
	

		

	

	

P 

JINST 

Detector and Physics Performance at a Muon Collider 

Nazar Bartosik, 1 Alessandro Bertolin, 2 Laura Buonincontri, 6 Massimo Casarsa, 3 Francesco 

Collamati, 4 Alfredo Ferrari, 5 Anna Ferrari, 8 Alessio Gianelle, 2 Donatella Lucchesi, 6 Nikolai 

Mokhov, 9 Mark Palmer, 10 Nadia Pastrone, 1 Paola Sala, 7 Lorenzo Sestini, 2 Sergei Striganov 9 

1 INFN Sezione di Torino, Torino, Italy 
2 INFN Sezione di Padova , Padova, Italy 
3 INFN Sezione di Trieste , Trieste, Italy 
4 INFN Sezione di Roma , Roma, Italy 
5 CERN, Geneva, Switzerland 
6 University of Padova and INFN Sezione di Padova , Padova, Italy 
7 INFN Sezione di Milano, Milano, Italy 
8 HZDR, Dresden, Germany 
9 Fermilab, Batavia, Illinois, United States 
10 Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York, United States 

E-mail: donatella.lucchesi@pd.infn.it, lorenzo.sestini@pd.infn.it, 

massimo.casarsa@ts.infn.it, nazar.bartosik@to.infn.it 

A 
: A muon collider represents the ideal machine to reach very high center-of-mass en-
ergies and luminosities by colliding elementary particles. This is the result of the low level of 
beamstrahlung and synchrotron radiation compared to linear or circular electron-positron colliders. 
In contrast with other lepton machines, the design of a detector for a multi-TeV muon collider re-
quires the knowledge of the interaction region due to the presence of a large amount of background 
induced by muon beam decays. The physics reaches can be properly evaluated only when the 
detector performance is determined. In this work, the background generated by muon beams of 
750 GeV is characterized and the performance of the tracking system and the calorimeter detector 
are illustrated. Solutions to minimize the effect of the beam-induced background are discussed and 
applied to obtain track and jet reconstruction performance. The µ + µ − → Hν ν → b bν ν process 
is fully simulated and reconstructed to demonstrate that physics measurements are possible in this 
harsh environment. The precision on Higgs boson coupling to b b is evaluated for 
√ 
s = 1.5, 3, and 
10 TeV and compared to other proposed machines. 

K 
: Detector modelling and simulations I (interaction of radiation with matter, interaction 
of photons with matter, interaction of hadrons with matter, etc); Large detector systems for particle 
and astroparticle physics; Performance of High Energy Physics Detectors. 

A X 
P 
: 1234.56789 

arXiv:2001.04431v2 [hep-ex] 29 Jan 2020 


Contents 

1 Introduction 
1 

2 Beam-induced background characterization 
2 

3 Detector performance 
2 
3.1 Tracks reconstruction performance 
5 
3.2 Jet reconstruction and identification performance 
7 

4 Reconstruction of Higgs boson decay to b-jets 
9 
4.1 b-jet identification algorithm and performance 
9 
4.2 H → b b selection 
11 

5 Higgs Boson coupling to b−quark 
11 
5.1 Higgs Boson coupling to b−quark at 
√ 
s = 1.5 TeV 
11 
5.2 Higgs Boson coupling to b quarks at 
√ 
s = 3 TeV and 
√ 
s = 10 TeV 
13 

6 Comparison to other future machines 
14 

7 Summary and Conclusion 
14 

1 Introduction 

In a multi-TeV muon collider, the effects of the background induced by the muon beam decays 
need to be evaluated in detail at the detector level to be able to estimate the physics reach. In fact, 
the muon decay products can contaminate the Interaction Region (IR) from a distance that varies 
with the beam energy and the collider optics and its superconducting magnets, with appropriate 
protective elements, need to be designed and included in the simulations [1] to have an accurate 
background description. Previous studies [2-4] have found that two cone-shaped tungsten shields 
can be used to protect the IR and the detector from the extremely high flux of beam background 
particles. As a consequence, the exact design of the machine-detector interface (MDI), which 
includes these shields, is needed to evaluate the distribution of the induced background at any part 
of the detector. The beam-induced background generated by the MAP collaboration [5] with the 
IR and the MDI optimized for 1.5-TeV center-of-mass energy [3] are used to study the effect on the 
tracking system and on the calorimeter detector. The software framework used for the propagation 
of the beam-induced background through the detector is inherited from the MAP collaboration 
and has been further developed to obtain the final results. The production and decay of the Higgs 
boson µ + µ − → Hν ν → b bν ν at 
√ 
s = 1.5 TeV is studied to determine the reconstruction and 
identification efficiencies, that are used to evaluate the sensitivity to the b b coupling. Samples of 
µ + µ − → Hν ν → b bν ν at particle level are generated also at 
√ 
s = 3, 10 TeV and a conservative 
calculation of the sensitivities at these energies is presented. 

-1 -


2 Beam-induced background characterization 

The simulation of the beam-induced background has been performed with the MARS15 software [6] 
and studied for machines with a center of mass energy of 
√ 
s = 1.5 TeV and 
√ 
s = 125 GeV, as 
discussed in detail in Refs. [3, 4] and in Ref. [7]. The background particles reaching the detector 
are mainly produced by the interactions of the decay products of the muon beams with the machine 
elements. Their type, flux, and characteristics strongly depend on the machine lattice and the 
interaction point configuration, which in turn depend on the collision energy. The background 
particles may be produced tens of meters upstream the interaction point, as can be seen in Figure 1. 
Therefore, a detailed layout of the machine and the machine-detector interface must be included in 
the simulation. In particular, the opening angle of two shielding cones ("nozzles"), introduced to 
mitigate the effects of the beam-induced background inside the detector, must be optimized for a 
specific beam energy and it will affect the detector acceptance. 

Figure 1. Illustration of the model of the machine and machine-detector interface built for the MARS15 
simulation. The shielding nozzles, described in the text, are represented in yellow inside the detector. This 
figure has been reproduced from Ref. [8]. 

Nevertheless, the flux of particles surviving the shielding is very high. Their main properties 
are a relatively low momentum and an arrival time in each sub-detector asynchronous with respect 
to the beam crossing. Figure 2 shows the momentum spectra of the electromagnetic (left) and 
hadronic (central) components of the beam-induced background for a muon beam of 750 GeV. The 
first one is relatively soft ( p ph. = 1.7 MeV and p el. = 6.4 MeV), whereas the second one has 
an average momentum of about half a GeV ( p n = 477 MeV and p ch.had. = 481 MeV). The time 
of arrival of the particles at the detector entry point with respect to the bunch crossing time for the 
different background components is shown on the right of Figure 2. The peaks that are evident 
around zero are primarily due to the leakage of photons and electrons around the interaction point, 
where the shielding is minimal. 

3 Detector performance 

The detector model and software framework used for the studies presented in this paper can be 
found also in Ref. [7] and [8]. Figure 3 presents a schematic view of the detector components, as 

-2 -


Figure 2. Characteristics of the beam-induced background particles at the detector entry point: the momen-
tum spectra for photons and electrons and for neutrons and charged hadrons are shown in the left and central 
panels, respectively; the time of arrival with respect to the beam crossing time is shown on the right. 

implemented in the ILCRoot framework [11]. These studies focus on the tracking and calorimeter 
systems, a full simulation of the muon detector is not currently available. Both the tracker and the 
calorimeter are immersed in a solenoidal magnetic field of 3.57 T. 
The tracking system consists of a vertex detector (VTX), an outer silicon tracker (SiT) and a 
forward tracker (FTD). The vertex detector, located just outside a 400-µm thick Beryllium beam 
pipe of 2.2-cm radius, is 42-cm long with five cylindrical layers at distances from 3 to 12.9 cm in 
the transverse plane to the beam axis and four disks on each side. Outside the VTX, a 330-cm long 
silicon tracker is comprised of five cylindrical layers at radial distances between 25 and 126 cm and 
14 forward disks. 

Figure 3. Schematic view of the detector, with each component identified by the label 

. 

The forward tracker consists of three disks on each side of the SiT at z = ±120, ±155, ±190 
cm, which cover the very forward regions and are properly shaped to host the nozzles. The silicon 
sensors of all the tracking detectors are based on silicon pixel technology. The VTX sensors have a 

-3 -


pixel granularity of 20 × 20 µm 2 and a thickness of 75 µm in the barrel and 100 µm in the disks. 
The SiT and the FTD feature pixel sensors of 50 × 50-µm 2 pitch and 200-µm thickness. The full 
simulation output is digitized, with signals that include electronic noise as well as threshold and 
saturation effects. 
Despite the mitigation of the beam-induced background provided by the shielding nozzles, a 
large particle flux reaches the detector, causing a very high occupancy in the first layers of the 
tracking system that impacts the detector performance. New generation 4D silicon sensors, which 
provide both spatial and time information, would allow exploitation of the peculiar time distribution 
of the background hits and remove a significant fraction of them. An optimized hit selection time 
window for each tracking layer was studied in a sample of muons, generated at the IP with a flat 
p T spectrum between 0.5 and 100 GeV. The distributions of the arrival times registered by each 

Figure 4. Distributions of the tracker hit times with respect to the bunch crossing for 75 µm/100 µm-thick 
sensors (left) and 200 µm-thick sensors (right) in a sample of muons with 0.5 &lt; p T &lt; 100 GeV. The tails on 
the right are due to the low-momentum muons. 

sensor with respect to the bunch crossing are shown in Figure 4, where average time resolutions σ T 
of 50 ps and 100 ps are assumed for the sensors with a thickness of 75 µm/100 µm and 200 µm, 
respectively [9]. The contribution to the time resolution due to the time spread of the beam spot 
is estimated to be ∼30 ps. Figure 5 shows the reduction in the tracker layers occupancy, when the 
hit times are required to be consistent with the arrival time of particles produced at the IP within a 
±3 σ T window. 

The calorimeter response is fully simulated for a Dual-Readout Integrally Active and Non 
segmented Option (ADRIANO) [10]. The geometry is fully projective covering polar angles down 
to 8.4 • . Barrel and end-cap regions are formed by about 23600 towers of 1.4 • aperture angle of 
lead glass with scintillating fibers. Cherenkov and scintillation hits are generated separately and 
digitized independently. The full simulation includes photodetector noise, wavelength-dependent 
light attenuation and collection efficiency and energy cluster digitization. Beam-induced back-
ground generates an almost flat distribution of noise in each tower, similar to an underlying event 
as displayed on the left of Figure 6. Part of this noise is removed by the jet clustering algorithm 
as discussed in 3.2. The time of deposited energy in each tower can be exploited further to best 
suppress the beam-induced background. On the right of Figure 6 the distribution of arrival time 
for all the energy cluster is shown in black compared, in red, with the same distribution for muons 

-4 -


Figure 5. Hit density for each tracker layer before and after the time requirements. 

coming from the primary vertex. The late component can be removed by applying a proper time 
window, that has to be optimized tower by tower. However the timing information are not used for 
the current studies, therefore better results are expected in the future. 

Figure 6. Left: Energy distribution in the calorimeter of the beam-induced background. Right: Distribution 
of the arrival time at a given calorimetry position of particles generated by beam radiation and of muons 
coming from primary vertex. The particles arrival time is measured with respect to t 0 , defined as the arrival 
time in the given position of a photon produced in the primary vertex at the collision time 

. 

3.1 Tracks reconstruction performance 

Hits surviving the selection discussed in Section 3 are used as an input to a parallel Kalman filter, 
as implemented in the ILCRoot framework. Pattern recognition and track finding are performed 
simultaneously with an iterative procedure with increasing search windows for hits in the following 
tracker layers at each iteration. This method guarantees high tracking efficiency, but requires signif-
icant computing resources and long processing times. With the available code, only four iterations 
were feasible for events with beam-induced background. Figure 7 shows the tracking efficiency 
evaluated in a sample of muons as a function of transverse momentum (p T ) and pseudorapidity (η) 

-5 -


for different numbers of iterations. The tracking efficiency is defined as the fraction of generated 
particles in the tracker geometrical acceptance that are matched to a good-quality reconstructed 
track. The effect of fewer iterations in the track finding procedure is a drop in efficiency for low-p T 
and high-η particles. Four iterations represented a good trade-off between an acceptable reconstruc-
tion efficiency and a practical processing time. As an example, the tracking of one beam-induced 
background event, ∼60000 tracks with p T &gt; 0.5 GeV, takes approximately one hour on an Intel 
Xeon CPU E5-2665 2.40GHz with 32GB RAM in the case of four iterations with a CPU time that 
increases non-linearly with the number of iterations. 

Figure 7. Tracking efficiency for different numbers of iterations as a function of the transverse momentum 
p T (left) and the psudorapidity η (right) in a sample of muons. 

The track reconstruction performance is assessed in samples of single muons generated at 
different momenta and pseudorapidities. In the left panel of Figure 8 is shown the tracking 
efficiency as a function of the transverse momentum for three representative values of |η|: the 
tracker central region, the forward region and the crack between the two. As expected, there is a 
loss of efficiency at low momentum, which is more evident on the right panel, where the efficiency 
is plotted as a function of |η| for three different momentum values. Low efficiency at high η is 
expected both due to the lower performance of the reconstruction algorithm and the limited coverage 
of the detector because of the shielding nozzles. The relative transverse momentum resolution of 
the reconstructed tracks is reported in Figure 9 for samples of single muons. The left panel shows 
the track p T resolution as a function of p T in different |η| regions. In the central and forward regions 
the p T resolution is lower than 5 × 10 −4 GeV −1 for p T &gt; 10 GeV, while tracks reconstructed in the 
crack between the central layers and the forward disks present a degraded resolution. The right 
panel shows the p T resolution as a function of pseudorapidity for muons with p = 1, 10, 100 GeV. 
The resolution degrades visibly for tracks of low momentum and high |η|. 

-6 -


Figure 8. Muon tracking efficiency as a function of p T for three representative |η| values (left) and as a 
function of |η| for three different momenta (right). 

Figure 9. Track p T resolution as a function of p T (left) for three representative values of |η| and as a function 
of |η| (right) for three ranges of muon momenta. Each bin has been calculated as the width of the distribution 
∆p T /p 2 
T , where ∆p T is the difference between the generated muon p T and the p T of the corresponding 
reconstructed track. 

3.2 Jet reconstruction and identification performance 

Jet reconstruction was not part of the ILCRoot package and a simple dedicated algorithm that 
takes into account the high yield of particles coming from the beam-induced background has 
been developed. Jet reconstruction is performed using the calorimeter clusters, which are selected 
according to the following algorithm: 

1. the calorimeter detector is divided in several pseudorapidity regions of equal width; 

2. in each region the mean E and the standard deviation σ E of the calorimeter cluster energies 
are calculated; 

3. calorimeter clusters with an energy E higher than E + 2 • σ E are selected; 

4. the energy of the selected clusters is corrected by subtracting the mean value E of the 
corresponding region. 

-7 -


This selection algorithm is designed to remove, at least in part, the beam-induced background which 
is diffused in the calorimeter as shown in Figure 6. In this way, signals originated by particles 
coming from the primary interaction, are identified as energy deposition significantly above the 
mean background energy. 
Selected calorimeter clusters are then used as inputs to the jet clustering algorithm: a cone 
algorithm [15] with a radius parameter of R = 0.5 is employed, where R is the distance in the 
pseudorapidity (η) and azimuthal angle (φ) plane between the jet axis and each cluster. Calorimeter 
clusters with an energy greater than 2 GeV are considered as seeds. The raw jet energy is obtained 
as the sum of the energies of the clusters belonging to the jet. 
In order to evaluate the jet energy corrections needed to assess the jet algorithm performance, 
a simulated sample of µ + µ − → H(→ b b)ν ν events at 
√ 
s = 1.5 TeV is used. This physics process 
has been generated at particle level with Pythia 8 [14] and the full simulation with beam-induced 
background is employed to obtain the detector response. Truth-level jets are clustered by using 
truth-level stable particles as inputs to the cone algorithm. Then a reconstructed, detector-level jet 
is matched with a truth-level jet if the distance in the (η, φ) space between their axes is less than 0.5. 
Reconstructed jets that fulfill this requirement are indicated as truth-matched jets in the text. 
The truth-level jet transverse momentum (p T ) is shown in Figure 10 as a function of the 
average jet raw p T . It is evident that the truth-level jet p T is strongly correlated with the raw jet p T 

Figure 10. Truth-level jet p T as a function of the raw p T of reconstructed jets. 

demonstrating the correctness of the reconstruction. A polynomial fit to the graph is performed in 
order to obtain the jet energy correction function, which is applied to the reconstructed-level jets to 
determine the nominal jet energy starting from the raw jet energy. 
The jet transverse momentum resolution ∆p T 
p T is defined as the difference between the jet p T 
and the matched truth-level jet p T , divided by the truth-level jet p T . The average ∆p T 
p T as a function 
of the jet transverse momentum is shown in Figure 11 (left) for simulated b-jets . The resolution 
varies from 30% to 40% depending on the jet p T . 
The jet reconstruction efficiency, the number of reconstructed jets matched with truth-level 
jets divided by the total number of truth-level jets is shown, as a function of the jet transverse 

-8 -


momentum, on the right of Figure 11. The efficiency is around 50% for low-p T jets and around 
70% for p T &gt; 60 GeV. 

Figure 11. Left: average jet transverse momentum resolution as a function of the jet transverse momentum. 
Right: jet reconstruction efficiency as a function of the jet transverse momentum. 

. 

The rate of fake jets is not really meaningful: the algorithm is not optimized and a better 
jet reconstruction will be achievable in the future by implementing a Particle Flow algorithm that 
considers both tracks and calorimeter clusters as inputs. In order to give an idea of the performance 
on the current reconstruction, the number of reconstructed jets not matched with a truth-level jet 
divided by the total number of reconstructed jets is evaluated. The fake-rate is found to be the order 
of 25% for jets with p T &gt; 40 GeV. 

4 Reconstruction of Higgs boson decay to b-jets 

The H → b b final state is identified in two steps: the identification of b−jets and the selection of 
the b b resonance among physics background events. 

4.1 b-jet identification algorithm and performance 

A b-jet tagging algorithm has been developed to reduce the background coming from light quark 
and gluon jets and from fake jets originated by several background sources in particular the beam-
induced background. The algorithm is inspired by the one employed by the LHCb collaboration 
[12] and uses tracks inside the jet cone to identify decay vertices compatible with b-hadron decays. 
The algorithm has the following steps: 

1. for a given reconstructed jet, tracks inside the jet cone are selected, requiring for each track a 
p T greater than 500 GeV and an impact parameter with respect to the µ + µ − interaction point 
greater than 0.04 cm. Only good quality tracks are selected by requiring a minimum number 
of hits; 

2. 2-track vertices are formed by imposing the distance of closest approach between the tracks 
to be less than 0.02 cm. The total p T of the two tracks must be greater than 2 GeV; 

3. 3-track vertices are formed by linking two 2-track vertices that share one track; 

-9 -


4. if at least one 3-tracks vertex is found, then the jet is tagged as a b-jet. 

This algorithm is very simple and cut-based. Presently higher performance methods are available 
which exploit machine learning techniques. In the future the most suitable algorithm, tuned for the 
process under study will be applied. 

The limitations on the tracks reconstruction explained in 3.1, prevent application of the b−jet 
tagging algorithm to the full event, µ + µ − → H(→ b b)ν ν with beam-induced background overlay. 
The overall performance is evaluated separately and then applied to the Higgs boson reconstruction. 
In Figure 12 the two most discriminating observables related to secondary vertex (SV) in truth-
matched b-jets are compared with those related to SVs found in background events, in this particular 
case the beam-induced background. The two observables are the invariant mass of the tracks 
belonging to the SV and the pseudo-lifetime, defined as t = 

m B 0 •d 

p , where m B 0 is the nominal B 0 
mass, d is the secondary vertex distance from the interaction point and p is the overall momentum 
of the tracks associated to the SV. It is evident that it will be well within the performance of any 
algorithm to efficiently select b−jets. 

Figure 12. Left: invariant mass of tracks associated to SV for truth-matched b-jets from Higgs decay events 
(red) and for beam-induced background events (green). Right: pseudo-lifetime for truth-matched b-jets from 
Higgs decay events (red) and for beam-induced background (green). A negative pseudo-lifetime is assigned 
if d projection with respect to the jet axis is negative. 

The b-tagging efficiency is defined as the number of tagged and reconstructed b-jets divided 
by the total number of reconstructed b-jets. The b-tagging efficiency as a function of the jet p T is 
presented in Figure 13. It can be seen that the it varies from about 40% to about 60% at high jet p T . 
These values are very close to what is currently obtained in analyses of the LHC experiments. The 
misidentification rate is evaluated on a statistical basis since it is not possible to determine it directly 
by using beam-induced background events due to tracking limitations. The (η, φ) space is divided 
in cone regions with R = 0.5, in each cone SVs are reconstructed with the b-tagging algorithm. 
The ratio between the number of cones with at least one fake SV and the total number of cones is 
taken as the misidentification rate. It varies between 1% and 3% depending on the requirements on 
the tracks. In this way the effect of the beam induced background on the Higgs boson identification 
is included through the b-tagging efficiency. 

-10 -


Figure 13. b-tagging efficiency as a function of the jet p T . 

4.2 H → b b selection 

The µ + µ − → H(→ b b)ν ν events generated at 
√ 
s = 1.5 TeV are reconstructed by using a simple 
procedure. The fiducial region is defined by two jets with p T &gt; 40 GeV and pseudorapidity in the 
range −2.5 &lt; η &lt; 2.5. Therefore, the first requirement is to have two reconstructed and b-tagged 
jets in the fiducial region. The acceptance, A, is defined as the number of events with two b-jets 
from Higgs boson decay in the fiducial region divided by the number of generated H → b b events. 
At 
√ 
s = 1.5 TeV the acceptance is found to be A = 0.35. The selection efficiency ( ) is defined 
as the number of fully reconstructed H → b b events divided by the number of events with two 
truth-level b-jets from Higgs boson decay in the fiducial region, and it is found to be = 15%. The 
reconstructed di-jet invariant mass of truth-matched b-jets in H → b b events is shown in Figure 14. 
The presence of the beam-induced background could have jeopardized this distribution making the 
Higgs boson identification very difficult. Instead the Higgs boson peak is clearly visible in the di-jet 
invariant mass. 

5 Higgs Boson coupling to b−quark 

In addition to demonstrating that one of the most critical decay channels, H → b b, is reconstructed 
efficiently at a muon collider, the achievable sensitivity on the couplings is evaluated for three 
different center-of-mass energies. 

5.1 Higgs Boson coupling to b−quark at 
√ 
s = 1.5 TeV 

In this section the sensitivity of the measurement of the Higgs boson coupling to b quarks (g H bb ) 
in µµ collisions at 
√ 
s = 1.5 TeV is studied. Since the Higgs boson production at 
√ 
s = 1.5 TeV 
is dominated by WW fusion [7] the H → b b production cross section (σ) is related to the Higgs 
boson couplings as follows: 

σ = σ(ννH) • BR(H → b b) = 
g 2 
HWW g 2 

H bb 

Γ H 
, 
(5.1) 

-11 -


Figure 14. The di-jet invariant mass of truth-matched b-jets in H → b b full-simulated events at 
√ 
s = 1.5 
TeV. 

where g HWW is the coupling of the Higgs boson to the W boson and Γ H is the Higgs boson width. 
The uncertainty on g 2 
H bb is, therefore, related to the measured cross section. 
The number of observed H → b b events (N) is given by: 

N = A • • σ • L • t, 
(5.2) 

where A is the acceptance, is the selection efficiency, L is the instantaneous luminosity and t is the 
data-taking time. By using a sample of events generated with Pythia 8, which are fully simulated 
and reconstructed following the procedure described above, the H → b b cross section at 
√ 
s = 1.5 
TeV is found to be σ = 203 fb. Therefore, with an instantaneous luminosity of L = 1.25 • 10 34 
cm −2 s −1 in a data taking period of four Snowmass years (t = 4 • 10 7 s) the number of observed 
Higgs boson events decaying to b b is N = 5500. 
The uncertainty on the cross section determination is calculated by assuming A, , L, t known 
with a good precision, and it is given, approximately, by the number of events after all the selections: 

∆σ 
σ 

√ 
N + B 
N 
, 
(5.3) 

where B is the expected number of background events. In principle, with a combined fit to the 
di-jet invariant mass and discriminating kinematic variables, it should be possible to disentangle 
the signal from the background, thus reducing the uncertainty on the cross section. In this study, a 
conservative estimate based on equation 5.3 is used to evaluate the uncertainty on the cross section. 
The contribution to the background events comes from two sources: physics processes and 
uncorrelated background. The first contribution is evaluated with Monte Carlo simulation. The 
Standard Model processes considered as possible background are listed in Table 1. The number 
of background events with b b final states have been estimated by applying reconstruction and b-
tagging efficiencies to generator-level samples produced with Pythia 8. The contribution of light 
quark events, for example those with two b−tags in the final state, due mainly to beam-induced 
background, has been calculated applying the same procedure used for physics processes. In this 

-12 -


Process 
µ + µ − → γ  *  /Z → q 
q 
µ + µ − → γ  *  /Zγ  *  /Z → q q +X 
µ + µ − → γ  *  /Zγ → q qγ 

Table 1. List of Standard Model processes considered in the background estimation for the H → b b cross 
section measurement. q indicates a generic quark. 

case, however, the tagging mis-identification rate is used instead of the b-tagging efficiency. The 
fake-jet contribution, after the b-tagging requirements, is considered negligible. The number of 
expected background events after considering all the contributions, is B = 6700. At this point it is 
possible to evaluate the uncertainty on the cross section by using equation 5.3, ∆σ 
σ = 2.0%. 
According to equation 5.1, it is necessary to also know g HWW and Γ H in order to determine 
g H bb . Knowledge of the H → b b cross section is not enough. In the following, it is assumed that 
g HWW and Γ H can be measured with the same level of precision expected by CLIC at 
√ 
s = 1.4 
TeV [13]. This is justified by the fact that the selection of muonic final states at a muon collider is 
analogous to that at electron-positron accelerators, since the beam-induced background stops at the 
calorimeters and is not expected in muon detectors. Therefore the uncertainty on the coupling can 
be obtained with: 

∆g H bb 
g H bb 
= 
1 
2 

∆σ 
σ 

2 

+ 

∆ 

g 2 

H W W 

Γ H 

g 2 

H W W 

Γ H 

2 

, 
(5.4) 

where the uncertainty on 

g 2 

H W W 

Γ H 

has been extracted from the CLIC study [13] and scaled for the 
lower integrated luminosity assumed for the muon collider at 
√ 
s = 1.5 TeV. The expected sensitivity 
on the Higgs coupling to b quark at 
√ 
s = 1.5 TeV is then found to be ∆g H b b 
g H b b = 1.9%. 

5.2 Higgs Boson coupling to b quarks at 
√ 
s = 3 TeV and 
√ 
s = 10 TeV 

The procedure used in 5.1 is also applied to evaluate the sensitivity to the g H bb coupling when it is 
measured in muon collisions at 
√ 
s = 3.0 TeV and 
√ 
s = 10 TeV. This approach is very conservative. 
The efficiencies obtained with the full simulation at 
√ 
s = 1.5 TeV are used for the higher center-
of-mass energy cases, with the proper scaling to take into account the different kinematic region. 
At higher 
√ 
s the tracking and the calorimeter detectors are expected to perform significantly better 
since the yield of the beam-induced background decreases with 
√ 
s as demonstrated in [7]. The 

uncertainty on 

g 2 

H W W 

Γ H 

at 
√ 
s = 3.0 TeV is taken from the CLIC study at the same center-of-mass 
energy [13]. At 
√ 
s = 10 TeV this uncertainty is assumed equal to the one at 
√ 
s = 3.0 TeV, for 
the moment this is the only estimated number and, following the conservative approach that drives 
this work, it is used as it is. It is reasonable to imagine that when the full Higgs boson couplings 
analysis will be done at 
√ 
s = 10 TeV it will improve. 
The instantaneous luminosity, L, at different 
√ 
s are taken from [16]. The integrated luminosity 
L int , is calculated by using the standard four Snowmass years. The acceptances, A, the number 
of signal events, N, and background, B, are determined with simulation. The uncertainties on σ 
and g H bb are calculated and summarized in Table 2 with all relevant inputs. The resulting relative 

-13 -


uncertainty on the coupling is 1.0% at 
√ 
s = 3.0 TeV and 0.91% at 
√ 
s = 10 TeV. It has to be noted 

that the result at 
√ 
s = 10 TeV is dominated by the error on 

g 2 

H W W 

Γ H , which is assumed equal to the 
one used at 
√ 
s = 3 TeV. 
√ 
s 
A 
L 
L int 
σ 
N 
B 

∆σ 
σ 

∆g H b b 
g H b b 

[TeV] [%] [%] [cm −2 s −1 ] [ab −1 ] [fb] 
[%] 
[%] 
1.5 
35 
15 1.25 • 10 34 
0.5 
203 
5500 
6700 2.0 
1.9 
3.0 
37 
15 
4.4 • 10 34 
1.3 
324 33000 7700 0.60 
1.0 
10 
39 
16 
2 • 10 35 
8.0 
549 270000 4400 0.20 
0.91 

Table 2. Summary of the parameters used as inputs for the determination of the Higgs coupling to b quarks. 
The data taking time is assumed of 4 • 10 7 s. The parameter definitions are given in the text. 

6 Comparison to other future machines 

The direct comparison of the results obtained on ∆g H b b 
g H b b at muon collider with other colliders, as 
done in [17], is not available yet. In order to have an idea of the potential of an experiment at a 
muon collider, these results are compared to those published by CLIC [13]. CLIC numbers are 
obtained with a model-independent multi-parameters fit. In addition, the fit is performed in three 
stages, taking the statistical uncertainties obtainable at the three considered energy successively into 
account. This means that each new stage includes all measurements of the previous stages and is 
represented in Table 3 with a "+" in the integrated luminosity. 
The muon collider results are not complete, since not all the necessary parameters are deter-
mined. They are based on assumptions that are very conservative, as discussed in the previous 
sections. Data sample at the three center-of-mass energies are treated as independent, and not taken 
successively into account. This means that at 
√ 
s = 3 TeV the precision achieved by the experiment 
at muon collider uses 4 data-taking years while the CLIC number includes also the 4 years at 
√ 
s = 350 GeV. 
√ 
s [TeV] L int [ab −1 ] ∆g H b b 
g H b b [%] 

Muon Collider 

1.5 
0.5 
1.9 
3.0 
1.3 
1.0 
10 
8.0 
0.91 

CLIC 

0.35 
0.5 
3.0 
1.4 
+1.5 
1.0 
3.0 
+2.0 
0.9 

Table 3. Relative precision on Higgs boson coupling to b−quark at muon collider and at CLIC. The 
difference on how the numbers are obtained by the two experiments is described in the text. 

7 Summary and Conclusion 

A detailed study of the Higgs boson decay to b−jets at 
√ 
s = 1.5 TeV is presented, based on full 
simulation of the physics process and the beam-induced background. Physics performance of the 

-14 -


tracking and calorimeter detectors are discussed together with new ideas to mitigate the effect 
of the beam-induced background. The Higgs boson decay to b−jets is efficiently reconstructed 
demonstrating that the beam-induced background does not jeopardize physics performance of 
an experiment at muon collider. The uncertainty on the Higgs boson coupling to b−quark is 
determined under several assumptions and compared to the results obtained by CLIC in similar 
conditions showing the potential of the muon collider. It has to be noted that CLIC has quoted the 
best precision on g H bb [17]. 

Acknowledgments 

We owe a huge debt of gratitude to Anna Mazzacane and Vito Di Benedetto (FNAL) who made 
this study possible by providing us with the MAP's software framework and simulation code. We 
acknowledge support from Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare and from Department of Physics 
and Astronomy of the University of Padova. We thank the VenetoCloud for providing computing 
resources and Lucio Strizzolo and the IT team of INFN Trieste for their technical support with the 
local cloud computing. 

References 

[1] N.V. Mokhov et al., "The Higgs Factory Muon Collider Superconducting Magnets and their 
Protection against Beam Decay Radiation", 2018 JINST 13 P10024. 

[2] G.W. Foster and N.V. Mokhov, "Backgrounds and Detector Performance at a 2x2 TeV Muon 
Collider", AIP Conf. Proc. 352, 1994, pp. 178-190. 

[3] N.V. Mokhov and S.I. Striganov, "Detector Backgrounds at Muon Colliders", Phys. Procedia 37 
(2012) [arXiv:1204.6721]. 

[4] N.V. Mokhov, S.I. Striganov, and I.S. Tropin, "Reducing backgrounds in the Higgs factory muon 
collider detector", arXiv:1409.1939 (2014). 

[5] The Muon Accelerator Program, https://map.fnal.gov/. 

[6] N.V. Mokhov and C.C. James, "The MARS Code System UserâĂŹs Guide Version 15(2016)", 
doi:10.2172/1462233. 

[7] N. Bartosik et al., "Preliminary Report on the Study of Beam-Induced Background Effects at a Muon 
Collider", arXiv:1905.03725 (2019). 

[8] V. Di Benedetto et al., "A study of muon collider background rejection criteria in silicon vertex and 
tracker detectors", 2018 JINST 13 P09004. 

[9] W. Riegler and G. Aglieri Rinella, "Time resolution of silicon pixel sensors", 2017 JINST 12 P11017. 

[10] C. Gatto et al., "Status of Dual-readout R&amp;D for a linear collider in T1015 Collaboration", 
arXiv:1603.00909 [physics.ins-det] (2016). 

[11] C. Gatto et al., The IlcRoot FrameWork, 
http://www.dmf.unisalento.it/~danieleb/IlcRoot/. 

[12] LHCb Collaboration, "Identification of beauty and charm quark jets at LHCb", 2015 JINST 10 
P06013 [arXiv:1504.07670]. 

-15 -


[13] H. Abramowicz et al., "Higgs Physics at the CLIC Electron-Positron Linear Collider", Eur. Phys. J. C 
77, 475 (2017) [arXiv:1608.07538]. 

[14] T. Sjöstrand, S. Mrenna, P. Skands, "A Brief Introduction to PYTHIA 8.1", arXiv:0710.3820 [hep-ph] 
(2007). 

[15] G. Arnison et al. [UA1 Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 132 (1983) 214. 

[16] J.P.Delahaye et al. "Enabling Intensity and Energy Frontier Science with a Muon Accelerator Facility 
in the U.S.: A White Paper Submitted to the 2013 U.S. Community Summer Study of the Division of 
Particles and Fields of the American Physical Society", arXiv:1308.0494 (2013). 

[17] J. de Blas et al., Higgs Boson studies at future particle colliders, arXiv:1905.03764 (2019). 

-16 -



	

