
	

		

	

	

Note: Within nine months from the publication of the mention of the grant of the European patent, any person may give 
notice to the European Patent Office of opposition to the European patent granted. Notice of opposition shall be filed in 
a written reasoned statement. It shall not be deemed to have been filed until the opposition fee has been paid. (Art. 
99(1) European Patent Convention). 

Printed by Jouve, 75001 PARIS (FR) 

(19) 

EP 1 566 853 B1 

&amp; 

(11) 

EP 1 566 853 B1 

(12) 

EUROPEAN PATENT SPECIFICATION 

(45) Date of publication and mention 

of the grant of the patent: 
10.10.2007 Bulletin 2007/41 

(21) Application number: 05076190.7 

(22) Date of filing: 16.03.1999 

(51) Int Cl.: 

H05B 33/22 (2006.01) 
H05B 33/10 (2006.01) 
G02B 5/20 (2006.01) 
G02B 5/22 (2006.01) 

(54) Thin film formation method, display, and color filter 

Dünnschichtherstellungsverfahren, Anzeigevorrichtung und Farbfilter 

Méthode de réalisation d'un traitement de couches minces, affichage et filtre de couleur 

(84) Designated Contracting States: 

DE GB NL 

(30) Priority: 18.03.1998 JP 6914698 

(43) Date of publication of application: 

24.08.2005 Bulletin 2005/34 

(62) Document number(s) of the earlier application(s) in 

accordance with Art. 76 EPC: 
99907949.4 / 0 993 235 

(73) Proprietor: Seiko Epson Corporation 

Shinjuku-ku 
Tokyo 163-0811 (JP) 

(72) Inventor: Yudasaka, Ichio, 

c/o Seiko Epson Corporation 
Suwa-shi, 
Nagano-ken 392-8502 (JP) 

(74) Representative: Kenyon, Sarah Elizabeth et al 

Miller Sturt Kenyon 
9 John Street 
London WC1N 2ES (GB) 

(56) References cited: 

EP-A-0 665 449 
EP-A-0 823 644 
EP-A-0 880 303 
EP-A-0 940 797 


EP 1 566 853 B1 

2 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

Description 

TECHNICAL FIELD 

[0001] The present invention relates to a thin film for-
mation technology suitable for manufacturing a display 
and a color filter having an EL (electroluminescence) de-
vice or an LED (light emitting diode), and more particu-
larly to a technology advantageous for forming a multi-
layer thin film layer between partition elements. 

BACKGROUND ART 

[0002] An ink jet method has been used to fill material, 
such as color resin, to organic semiconductor film of a 
display or to a color filter to manufacture liquid crystal 
panels for color display. 
[0003] When material is filled by an ink jet method, it 
is necessary to form partition elements to partition pixel 
areas (hereafter also called " banks" , a layer to form par-
tition elements is called a banks layer"), and to fill a thin 
film material solution to the area enclosed with the par-
tition elements. A thin film material solution, which vol-
ume is much larger than the volume after film formation, 
is filled in the pixel area enclosed with the partition ele-
ments. Since a display is generally demanded to be slim, 
the height of the partition elements is limited. Therefore 
the behavior of the thin filmmaterial solution filled there 
differs depending on the wettability (affinity) which the 
partition elements and the area enclosed with the parti-
tion elements have for the thin film material solution. 
[0004] If the partition elements have affinity for the ma-
terial, the material easily flows over to the adjacent pixel 
areas, even if the partition elements exist, when an 
amount of material exceeding the height of the partition 
elements is filled, as shown in Fig. 9A. If the partition 
elements have no affinity for the material, the material 
does not flow over to the adjacent pixel areas due to the 
surface tension of the material, even if the amount of 
material exceeding the height of the partition materials 
is filled, as shown in Fig. 9B. If this material is heated to 
evaporate the solvent, thickness after film formation be-
comes thick at the center of the pixel area and thin at the 
edges, since the material is repelled by the side walls of 
the partition elements, as shown in Fig. 9C. This causes 
color unevenness and reduces reliability. Also if the par-
tition elements are comprised of non-affinity elements, 
adhesion of the partition elements and ground plane of 
the partition elements is weak, which makes partition el-
ements easily separate. 
[0005] A prior art to solve such problems is a surface 
treatment technology to make the top of the partition el-
ements have no affinity and to make the other portions 
have affinity. Japanese Patent Laid-open No. 9-203803 
and Japanese Patent Laid-open No. 9-230129, for ex-
ample, disclose a technology to process the top portion 
of the partition elements to be ink repellent by irradiating 
ultraviolet rays, and the area enclosed with the partition 

elements to have affinity for ink. For the former, an ink 
repellent (non-affinity) layer is coated at the top portion 
of the partition elements, and for the latter, the concave 
portion enclosed with the partition elements is made to 
have affinity for ink (affinity) by ultraviolet irradiation. Log-
ical considerations of this technology are written in Inter-
national Display Research Conference 1997, pp. 238 -
241. According to this technology, even if material is filled 
to the height exceeding the height of the partition ele-
ments, the material is repelled by the non-affinity film, 
and does not overflow to the adjacent pixel areas, as 
shown in Fig. 10 A, since the side walls of the partition 
elements have affinity, and the thickness of formed film 
does not become thin at the edges of the pixel areas. 
[0006] However, even in the above known technology, 
it is not clear how to set affinity of the side walls of the 
partition elements, therefore it is difficult to obtain a flat 
thin film layer. Japanese Patent Laid-open No. 9-230129 
states that the degree of affinity is controlled by irradiating 
ultraviolet rays from both the front and back sides, but 
the degree of affinity and non-affinity, that is, how to set 
the respective contact angle to the thin film material so-
lution, is not known. 
[0007] If the non-affinity is too high, for example, the 
thin film layer becomes thin at the edges near the partition 
elements and thick at the center as shown in Fig. 9C. If 
affinity is too high, on the other hand, the thin film layer 
becomes thick at the edges near the partition elements 
and thin at the center as shown in Fig. 10B. 
[0008] Also the above known technology assumes that 
there is only one thin film layer, therefore it is totally un-
known how to treat the surface for forming a flat thin film 
layer for each layer when multi-layered thin film layers 
are formed. If the above known technology is applied for 
each layer, surface treatment is required each time a 
layer is formed, which requires numerous processing 
steps. 
[0009] EP0940797 discloses an active matrix display 
device in which a thick insulating film is preferably formed 
around an organic semiconductive film of a thin film lu-
minescent device without damaging the thin film lumi-
nescent device, the active matrix display device is pro-
vided with a bank layer along a data line and a scanning 
line to suppress formation of parasitic capacitance in the 
data line, in which the bank layer surrounds a region for 
forming the organic semiconductive film of the thin film 
luminescent device by an ink-jet process. The bank layer 
consists of a lower insulating layer composed of a thick 
organic material and an upper insulating layer of an or-
ganic material which is deposited on the lower insulating 
layer and has a smaller thickness so as to avoid contact 
of the organic semiconductive film with the upper insu-
lating layer. 

DISCLOSURE OF THE INVENTION 

[0010] The present inventor discovered that if plasma 
treatment is performed using fluorine gas, the contact 

1 
2 


EP 1 566 853 B1 

3 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

angle to ink is greatly different between an organic sub-
stance and an inorganic substance, depending on the 
mixing ratio of oxygen gas and fluorine gas. The present 
inventor also discovered that affinity can be controlled 
by forming banks where affinity material and non-affinity 
material are alternately layered and by executing plasma 
treatment. 
[0011] It is accordingly an object of the present inven-
tion to provide a substrate structure. 
[0012] An example is given on how to control affinity 
without going through many processing steps for affinity 
control by managing surface treatment under predeter-
mined conditions, so as to decrease the cost required for 
affinity control and to form multi-layer thin films having a 
uniform film thickness. 
[0013] An example is given on how to provide a display 
layered by the thin film formation method which can form 
multi-layer films. By this, image display without uneven 
brightness and color is implemented and reliability is im-
proved. 
[0014] An example is given on how to provide a color 
filter layered by the thin film formation method which can 
form multi-layer films. By this, image display without un-
even brightness and color is implemented. 
[0015] To achieve the object, the present invention 
provides a substrate structure comprising: a substrate; 
a plurality of thin film layers laminated on the substrate 
and a bank enclosing an area in which the plurality of 
thin film layers are arranged, the bank including a first 
bank layer, a second bank layer and a third bank layer, 
the second bank layer being disposed between the first 
and third bank layers, the first and third bank layers being 
made from one of an inorganic material and an organic 
material, the second bank layer being made from the 
other of the inorganic material and the organic material, 
the first and third bank layers having affinity layers and 
the second bank layer having non-affinity. 
[0016] A thin film formation method is also described. 
The method is for forming a thin film layer by filling a thin 
film material solution in areas enclosed with banks, com-
prising a step of forming the banks on a bank formation 
face, and a step of filling the thin film material solution in 
the banks. The step of forming the banks is for forming 
the banks where an affinity bank layer and a non-affinity 
bank layer are alternately layered by repeating the step 
of forming the affinity bank layer with an affinity material 
and a step of forming the non-affinity bank layer with a 
non-affinity material one or more times. 
[0017] " Banks" here refer to partition elements which 
are formed to partition pixels of a display using a non-
affinity semiconductor thin film device or to partition pixel 
areas of a color filter. For the layer structure of a bank, 
the type of non-affinity material or affinity material may 
be changed for each layer. The thickness of each layer 
to be layered may be changed for each layer. The bank 
formation face is a face where the banks are formed, and 
may be a drive board of a display or a transparent board 
of a color filter. 

[0018] Affinity or non-affinity here is determined de-
pending on the characteristics of the thin film material 
solution used to fill. If the thin film material solution has 
a hydrophilic property, for example, the surface having 
a polar group exhibits affinity, and the surface having a 
non-polar group exhibits non-affinity. If the thin film ma-
terial solution has a lipophilic property, on the other hand, 
the surface having a polar group exhibits non-affinity, and 
the surface having a non-polar group exhibits affinity. The 
thin film material solution is selected in various ways de-
pending on the manufacturing target. When the hy-
drophilic property or hydrophobic property of the thin film 
material solution changes at every layer, the layer struc-
ture is changed such that the bottom layer, of the two 
bank layers formed at positions corresponding to the thin 
film layer formed by the thin film material solution, exhibits 
non-affinity to the thin film material solution, and the top 
layer exhibits affinity. When the thin film material solution 
has a hydrophilic property, for example, an affinity ma-
terial is an inorganic material and a non-affinity material 
is an organic material. When the thin film material solution 
has a hydrophobic property, an affinity material is an or-
ganic material and a non-affinity material is an inorganic 
material. 
[0019] This involves, for example, a method for forming 
the above mentioned bank layer by coating materials. In 
other words, the step of forming the non-affinity bank 
layer and the step of forming the affinity bank layer are 
steps of forming respective bank layers by coating pre-
determined materials dissolved in solvent. And the non-
affinity bank layer is formed by coating the material for 
the non-affinity bank layer before removing the solvent 
where the material of the affinity bank layer is dissolved. 
[0020] A step of executing a predetermined surface 
treatment for the banks and bank formation faces after 
the above step of forming the banks is also described. 
For the surface treatment, reduced pressure plasma 
treatment or atmospheric pressure plasma treatment is 
performed where the plasma gas is irradiated under a 
reduced pressure atmosphere or under atmospheric 
pressure using gas containing a fluorine or fluorine com-
pound as the introductory gas. A prescribed condition is, 
for example, to execute plasma treatment in gas contain-
ing a fluorine compound and oxygen. Under this condi-
tion, a non-reactive group is generated on the surface of 
the inorganic material by plasma discharge, the non-re-
active group is oxidized by oxygen, and a polar group, 
such as a carbonyl group or hydroxyl group, is generated. 
The polar group exhibits an affinity for fluid containing 
polar molecules, such as water, and exhibits non-affinity 
for fluid containing non-polar molecules. In parallel with 
the above reaction, a phenomenon where the fluorine 
compound molecules enter the organic material surface 
also occurs on the surface of the organic bank layer. 
[0021] Particularly when the amount of fluorine com-
pound is more than oxygen, that is, when the content of 
the fluorine compound to the total amount of fluorine com-
pound and oxygen is set to 60% or more, for example, 

3 
4 


EP 1 566 853 B1 

4 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

the surface is non-polarized by the mixing phenomenon 
of fluorine compound rather than by the influence of ox-
idation, since the mixing phenomenon of fluorine com-
pound is more active than oxidation by oxygen in a gas 
atmosphere where the amount of fluorine compound ex-
ceeds oxygen. Therefore if plasma treatment is executed 
for an organic material under the condition where the 
amount of fluorine compound exceeds oxygen, the or-
ganic material exhibits a non-affinity for fluid containing 
polar molecules and exhibits an affinity for fluid contain-
ing non-polar molecules. For the gas containing fluorine, 
halogen gas, such as CF4, SF6 or CHF3, is used. If a 
surface treatment is executed under this condition, the 
affinity of the surface of the non-affinity bank layer and 
the affinity bank layer is adjusted such that the difference 
between respective contact angles to the thin film mate-
rial solution is greater. As a result, the surface is treated 
such that the contact angle of the surface of the affinity 
bank layer to the thin film material solution becomes 30 
degrees or less, for example. And the surface is treated 
such that the contact angle of the non-affinity bank layer 
to the thin film material solution becomes 40 degrees or 
more, for example. 
[0022] In the above mentioned surface treatment step, 
the surface treatment is executed under a predetermined 
condition where the non-affinity bank layer has a higher 
degree of non-affinity for the thin film material solution 
compared with the affinity material. Also in the surface 
treatment step, the surface treatment is executed under 
a predetermined condition where the affinity of the affinity 
bank layer for the thin film material solution is less than 
the affinity of the area enclosed with the banks for the 
thin film material solution. 
[0023] In the above mentioned step of forming the 
banks, a set of an affinity bank layer and a non-affinity 
bank layer is formed by, for example, an affinity bank 
layer formation step of forming the affinity film with an 
affinity material, a non-affinity bank layer formation step 
of forming the non-affinity bank layer with a non-affinity 
material matching the bank formation area on the affinity 
bank layer, and a removal step of removing the affinity 
bank layer at the area where the non-affinity bank layer 
is not formed by etching using the non-affinity bank layer 
as a mask. Also in the step of forming the banks, a set 
of a affinity bank layer and a non-affinity bank layer is 
formed by a step of forming the affinity bank layer with 
an affinity material, a step of etching for etching the affinity 
bank layer matching the bank formation area in the bot-
tom layer, a step of forming the non-affinity bank layer 
with a non-affinity material covering the affinity bank lay-
er, and a step of etching the non-affinity bank layer match-
ing the bank formation area in the top layer. It is also 
acceptable to collectively etch two or more sets of an 
affinity bank layer and a non-affinity bank layer after over-
laying all or most of the affinity bank layers and non-
affinity bank layers, rather than to perform etching to form 
a bank shape each time. 
[0024] Here the non-affinity material is, for example, 

polyimide, amorphous silicon, polysilicon, an organic 
compound containing fluorine or an insulating organic 
compound (photosensitive material). The affinity material 
is such metal as Al and Ta, silicon oxide film or silicon 
nitride film. 
[0025] Preferably in the thin film layers, the thin film 
layer at the lowest layer is set to roughly the same thick-
ness as the affinity bank layer at the lowest layer of the 
bank. And each thin film layer layered on the lowest layer 
is set to a thickness roughly the same as the total of the 
respective thicknesses of the affinity bank layer and the 
non-affinity bank layer which are layered to a height cor-
responding to the banks. The contact shape of the wall 
faces of the banks and the liquid surface of the filled thin 
film material solution changes depending on the affinity 
of the wall faces. In the contact face with the affinity bank 
layer, the thickness of the thin film tends to increase since 
the thin film material solution contacts the wall face, and 
in the contact face with the non-affinity bank layer, the 
thickness of the thin film tends to decrease since the thin 
film material solution is repelled. The large amount of thin 
film material solution, which is filled, gradually decreases 
its volume by a heat treatment and other reasons, but if 
the layered structure is adjusted such that the liquid level 
of the thin film material solution comes to the boundary 
between the non-affinity bank layer and the affinity bank 
layer after heat treatment, then the characteristics of the 
non-affinity bank layer and the affinity bank layer are bal-
anced, and the liquid level of the thin film material solution 
becomes vertical to the bank wall face, generally becom-
ing flat. For example, the thickness of the non-affinity 
bank layer at the top layer is set to 500nm or less, and 
the thickness of the other non-affinity bank layer is set to 
100nm or less. 
[0026] Also described is a display comprised of layered 
thin film layer formed by filling thin film material solution 
in an area enclosed with banks, characterized in that the 
bank is comprised of alternately layered affinity bank lay-
ers formed with a material having affinity for the above 
mentioned thin film material solution and non-affinity 
bank layers formed with a material having non-affinity for 
the above mentioned thin film material solution, pixel 
electrodes made of ITO, for example, are formed in the 
area enclosed with the above mentioned banks, and the 
above mentioned thin film layer is formed with an organic 
semiconductor material for forming a thin film light emit-
ting element. 
[0027] Also described is a color filter comprised of lay-
ered thin film layers formed by filling a thin film material 
solution in areas enclosed with banks, characterized in 
that the bank is comprised of alternately layered affinity 
bank layers formed with a material having affinity for the 
above mentioned thin film material solution and non-af-
finity bank layers formed with a material having non-af-
finity for the above mentioned thin film material solution, 
a bank formation face is formed as a transparent board, 
the above mentioned banks are partition elements for 
partitioning the pixel areas, and the above mentioned 

5 
6 


EP 1 566 853 B1 

5 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

thin film layer is formed with a color resin material for 
providing colors to the above mentioned pixels. 
[0028] In the above mentioned display and color filter, 
the affinity bank layer and/or the non-affinity bank layer 
are surface-treated so as to have affinity or non-affinity 
respectively. 

BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS 

[0029] 

Fig. 1 is a cross-sectional view of a thin film layer 
structure in accordance with the first embodiment of 
the present invention; 
Fig. 2 is a cross-sectional view of manufacturing 
steps of a thin film formation method in accordance 
with the first embodiment of the present invention; 
Fig. 3 is a cross-sectional view of manufacturing 
steps of the thin film formation method in accordance 
with the first embodiment of the present invention 
(continued from Fig. 2); 
Fig. 4 is a graph depicting the relationship between 
the mixing ratio of fluorine and oxygen and the con-
tact angle in accordance with the principle of surface 
treatment of the present invention; 
Fig. 5 is a cross-sectional view of manufacturing 
steps of a thin film formation method in accordance 
with the second embodiment of the present inven-
tion; 
Fig. 6 is a cross-sectional view of an example when 
the present invention is applied to a color filter; 
Fig. 7 is a cross-sectional view of an example when 
the present invention is applied to an organic semi-
conductor light emitting element of a display; 
Fig. 8 is a cross-sectional view of another example 
when the present invention is applied to an organic 
semiconductor light emitting element of a display; 
Fig. 9 is a drawing depicting problems in convention-
al bank formation; and 
Fig. 10 is a drawing depicting problems in conven-
tional bank formation. 

BEST MODE FOR CARRYING OUT THE INVENTION 

[0030] Embodiments of the present invention will now 
be described with reference to the accompanying draw-
ings. 

(First embodiment) 

[0031] The first embodiment of the present invention 
concerns a thin film formation method using one of a 
plurality of types of layers constituting a bank as a mask 
for the other layers. 
[0032] Fig. 1 is a cross-sectional view of a thin film 
layer structure formed by the thin film formation method 
of the present invention. This layer structure can be used 
for various applications using multi-layered thin films. For 

example, this layer structure can be used for an EL de-
vice, LED and color filter using organic semiconductor 
thin films. The layer structure in Fig. 1 is a structure when 
a hydrophilic thin film material solution is used. In the 
case of a hydrophilic thin film solution, affinity for surface-
treated inorganic material is high, and affinity for organic 
material is low (non-affinity). 
[0033] As Fig. 1 shows, this layer structure is config-
ured by forming banks 110 on a bank formation face 100. 
The bank formation face may be a driving board where 
thin film transistors (TFT) used for a display are formed, 
or a transparent board used for a color filter. The structure 
of the bank formation face is not restricted as long as it 
is used for forming a thin film by filling fluid in areas en-
closed by banks, which are partition elements. It is pref-
erable that the bank formation face is made of a material 
which adheres to an affinity bank layer 111 forming the 
lowest layer of the bank 110. Particularly, it is preferable 
that the bank formation face is made of inorganic material 
in order to obtain appropriate affinity in the surface treat-
ment to be executed later. The bank formation face is 
comprised of ITO, which is a transparent electrode, and 
silicon in the case of a display, and is comprised of glass 
or quartz in the case of a color filter, so as to maintain 
strong adhesion with the affinity bank layer. 
[0034] The bank 110 is configured by alternately lay-
ered affinity bank layers 111 -11n (n is a natural number) 
and non-affinity bank layers 121 -12n. The surfaces of 
the affinity bank layers 111 -11n are treated so as to 
have a predetermined affinity for the thin film material 
solution forming the thin film layers 131 -13n at positions 
corresponding to the layer. As a material of the affinity 
bank layers 111 -11n, a material having good adhesion 
with the bank formation face 100 and the non-affinity bank 
layers 121 -12n is preferable, and the material may have 
any one of an insulating, semiconducting or conducting 
property. For example, such metal as Al and Ta, silicon 
oxide film (SiO 2 ) and silicon nitride film (SiNx), which are 
generally used as insulation film, can be used as the af-
finity bank layers 111-11n. It is not necessary to use the 
same material for each affinity bank layer. Any material 
which has good affinity for the thin film material solution 
of the thin film layer 13x, which is formed corresponding 
to each affinity bank layer 11x (x is an arbitrary natural 
number), can be used, and it is unnecessary to use the 
same material for all affinity bank layers. 
[0035] The surfaces of the non-affinity bank layers 121 
-12n are treated so as to have non-affinity for the thin 
film material solution forming the thin film layers 131 -
13n at positions corresponding to the layer. As a material 
of the non-affinity bank layers 121 -12n, a material having 
good adhesion with the affinity bank layers 111 -11n is 
preferable, and the material may have any one of an in-
sulating, semiconducting or conducting property. For ex-
ample, such material as polyimide, amorphous silicon, 
polysilicon, an organic compound containing fluorine or 
insulating organic compound can be used as the non-
affinity bank layers 121 -12n. It is not necessary to use 

7 
8 


EP 1 566 853 B1 

6 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

the same material for each non-affinity bank layer. Any 
material can be layered if affinity for the thin film material 
of the thin film layer 13x, which is formed corresponding 
to each affinity bank layer 11x (x is an arbitrary natural 
number), improves after surface treatment. For example, 
when this layer structure is applied to a color filter, the 
top layer 12n may be formed to be a black matrix so as 
to provide a shielding function. In order to form the top 
layer 12n as a shielding element, such metal as chrome, 
oxide or black resist material can be used. 
[0036] The thickness of each bank layer is set as fol-
lows. If the lowest layer is the affinity bank layer 131, the 
thickness d0 of the affinity bank layer 131 is set to be 
roughly the same as the thickness of the thin film layer 
131, which is formed corresponding to this layer. For the 
layers on the lowest layer, the thickness dx when the 
non-affinity bank layer 11x + 1 and the affinity bank layer 
12x are added is set to be roughly the same as the thick-
ness of the thin film layer 13x + 1, which is formed cor-
responding to these layers. The thickness of the thin film 
132, for example, is roughly the same as the thickness 
d1, which is the total thickness of the non-affinity bank 
layer 121 and the affinity bank layer 112. The thickness 
of the thin film layer 13n is roughly the same as the thick-
ness dn, which is the total thickness of the non-affinity 
bank layer 12n -1 and the affinity bank layer 11n. These 
settings are important to form a flat thin film layer. 
[0037] The above layered structure is applied when 
the thin film material solution is comprised of molecules 
with a polar group. When the thin film material solution 
is comprised of molecules without a polar group, the ma-
terial of the non-affinity bank layer and the material of the 
affinity bank layer are switched. 
[0038] If each one of the thin film layers is formed with 
molecules with a polar group or molecules without a polar 
group depending on the layer, materials of two bank lay-
ers, which are at positions where each thin film material 
solution is filled, are selected such that the bottom layer 
has non-affinity for the thin film material solution and the 
top layer has affinity. 
[0039] The thin film layers 131 -13n are comprised of 
materials having characteristics which match the pur-
pose of the respective layer. When this layered structure 
is applied to a display, for example, an arbitrary organic 
semiconductor thin film material solution is filled in each 
thin film layer. For each thin film layer, an organic semi-
conductor thin film material solution which emits primary 
colors is laminated for a plurality of layers, or material for 
a hole transporting layer or electron transporting layer is 
filled and layered according to necessity. When this lay-
ered structure is applied to a color filter, for example, 
resin with a different refractive index is filled and layered 
for each thin film layer. Such a layered thin film structure 
becomes an optical interference filter where only light 
with a specific wavelength is transmitted, which provides 
colors with good selectivity. 
[0040] A black matrix may be applied to the top layer 
of the bank. In other words, chromium oxide or black 

resist is coated. This layer may be used as the non-affinity 
layer or may be formed independently from the non-af-
finity layer. The thickness of each thin film layer 131 -
13n is, as mentioned above, set roughly the same as the 
total thickness of the non-affinity bank layer and the af-
finity bank layer which are formed at positions corre-
sponding to the thin film layer. 

(Function of layered structure) 

[0041] According to the above layered structure of the 
banks, equipment where thin film layers with uniform 
thickness are layered can be provided. When the banks 
110 are manufactured in the above structure, the thin film 
layer becomes flat. In other words, when thin film material 
solution is filled, the contact shape of the liquid surface 
of the thin film material solution to the wall faces changes 
depending on the affinity of the wall faces of the bank. In 
the contact face with the affinity bank layer, the thickness 
of the thin film tends to increase, since the thin film ma-
terial solution contacts the wall face, and in the contact 
face with the non-affinity bank layer, the thickness of the 
thin film tends to decrease since the thin film material 
solution is repelled. The large volume of thin filmmaterial 
solution which is filled, gradually decreases its volume 
by a heat treatment and other reasons, but if the layered 
structure is adjusted such that the liquid level of the thin 
film material solution comes to the boundary between 
the non-affinity bank layer and the affinity bank layer after 
heat treatment, then the characteristics of the non-affinity 
bank layer and the affinity bank layer are balanced, and 
the liquid level of the thin film material solution becomes 
vertical to the bank wall face, generally becoming flat. 
[0042] Equipment using this layered structure exhibit 
a predetermined effect since the thin film layer is flat. If 
the thickness of each thin film layer is uniform, when a 
light emitting type display device is formed by flowing 
current between electrodes, the current density between 
the electrodes becomes constant, which improves the 
uniformity of light emission preventing a concentration of 
current at a specific location, therefore reliability im-
proves. In the case of a device where voltage is applied 
between electrodes, an electric field is not applied on a 
thin area, therefore this layered structure improves reli-
ability and extends life. Color and brightness also be-
come uniform. When this layered structure is applied to 
a color filter, uniformity of colors improves and such prob-
lems as missing colors can be prevented. 

(Manufacturing method) 

[0043] Now a thin film formation method for obtaining 
this layered structure will be described with reference to 
the cross-sectional views on manufacturing steps in Fig. 
2 and Fig. 3. 

9 
10 


EP 1 566 853 B1 

7 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

Bank formation step (Fig. 2 A -D): 

[0044] In the bank formation step, the affinity bank lay-
ers 111 -11n and the non-affinity bank layers 121 -12n 
are layered on the bank formation face 100 so as to form 
the banks 110. 
[0045] At first, the affinity bank layer 111 is formed on 
the entire surface of the bank formation surface 100 (Fig. 
2 A). The formation methods, including the PECVD (Plas-
ma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition) method, the 
CVD (Chemical Vapor Deposition) method, evaporation 
method, sputtering method and various coating methods 
(spin coating, spray coating, roller coating, die coating 
and dip coating) are used depending on the material. For 
example, in this embodiment, SiO 2 film is formed using 
the spin coating method by SOG (Spin On Glass). The 
thickness of the affinity bank layer 111 at the lowest layer 
is matched with the thickness of the thin film layer 131. 
[0046] Then the non-affinity layer 121 is formed match-
ing the bank shape (Fig. 2 B). To form the non-affinity 
bank layer, an organic material is formed on the entire 
surface by the above mentioned method. When a normal 
photolithography method is used, a mask is placed 
matching the bank shape, the resist is exposed, devel-
oped and removed, and the organic material in the por-
tions which is not masked is removed by etching. When 
a printing method is used, the organic material is directly 
coated matching the bank shape by such a method as 
an intaglio, planographic or relief method. The thickness 
of the non-affinity bank layer 121 is a thickness where a 
function to repel the thin film material solution, which is 
filled in later, can be sufficiently exhibited. Adjustment, 
however, is necessary so that the total thickness of this 
layer and the next affinity bank layer 112 to be overlapped 
on this layer becomes roughly the same as the thin film 
layer 132. 
[0047] Then using the non-affinity bank layer 121 as a 
resist mask, the inorganic material film is etched (Fig. 2 
C). The non-affinity bank layer, which is an organic ma-
terial, can function as a resist mask. 
[0048] Next, just like in Fig. 2 A, SOG, an inorganic 
material, is coated on the entire surface (Fig. 2 D). The 
thickness of the inorganic material is a thickness where 
a function to contact with the thin film material solution, 
which is filled in later, can be sufficiently exhibited. Ad-
justment, however, is necessary so that the total thick-
ness of this layer and the non-affinity bank layer 121 un-
der this layer becomes roughly the same as the thin film 
layer 132. Hereafter, the bank is layered by repeating the 
steps in Fig. 2 B -D. 
[0049] The top layer to be layered is the non-affinity 
bank layer 12n. This is because if the top layer does not 
have non-affinity, the filled thin film material solution will 
flow over the banks 110. 
[0050] By the above steps, the structure comprised of 
the banks 110 and the concave portions 101 enclosed 
with the banks, as shown in Fig. 2 E, is formed. By this 
structure, the banks with a multi-layered structure, where 

the affinity layer and the non-affinity layer are alternately 
layered, are formed. After these steps, the step to se-
quentially fill the thin film material solution in the concave 
portions 101, as shown in Fig. 3 B, is executed. Here, 
surface treatment is executed to adjust the degree of 
affinity of the bank formation face 100 and each layer of 
the bank 110 for the thin film material solution. 

Surface treatment step (Fig. 3 A): 

[0051] In the surface treatment step, the affinity of the 
bank formation face 100 and each layer of the bank 110 
for the thin film material solution is adjusted by executing 
plasma treatment under predetermined conditions. In the 
plasma treatment of this invention, gas containing fluo-
rine is used as the introductory gas. This plasma treat-
ment may be reduced pressure plasma treatment under 
a reduced pressure atmosphere, or may be atmospheric 
pressure plasma treatment under atmospheric pressure. 
It is preferred that the reaction gas contains a predeter-
mined amount of oxygen. For the fluorine compound, 
CF 4 , SF 6 , and such halogen gas as CHF 3 can be used. 
[0052] Whether a surface becomes easy or difficult to 
wet by a fluid, such as thin film material solution, that is, 
whether the surface has affinity or non-affinity for the fluid, 
is known by measuring the contact angle of the surface 
to the fluid. Fig. 4 is a graph when changes of the contact 
angle were measured depending on the mixing ratio of 
fluorine compound and oxygen during plasma treatment 
for organic material and inorganic material. The contact 
angle is the contact angle to water-color ink (ink which 
can be diluted in water). This graph shows the case when 
CF 4 is used as the fluorine compound, polyimide as the 
organic material and SiOz and ITO (Indium-Tin-Oxide) 
as the inorganic material. Other materials will present a 
similar tendency depending on whether the material is 
organic or inorganic. As Fig. 4 shows, when oxygen ex-
ceeds the fluorine compound, the degree of the contact 
angle is not very different between the organic and inor-
ganic materials. When fluorine compound exceeds oxy-
gen, however, the contact angle of the organic material 
increases. (If the thin film material solution has affinity, 
the organic material exhibits non-affinity.) Whereas 
changes of the contact angle of an inorganic material are 
small. When oxygen is contained in the reaction gas, a 
polar group is generated in both inorganic and organic 
materials due to the oxidation function of oxygen. How-
ever, if the fluorine compound exceeds, fluorine com-
pound molecules enter the organic material, which rela-
tively decreases the influence of the polar group. There-
fore, by executing plasma treatment while controlling flu-
orine compound so as to exceed oxygen, the surface of 
the banks 110 and the bank formation face 100 can be 
set to a desired contact angle (affinity), as shown in Fig. 
4. In particular, using the optimum mixing ratio (CF 4 /CF 4 
+ O 2 = 75% -90%) is preferable to maximize the differ-
ence of the contact angle between the banks and the 
bank formation face. Critical is to set the difference of the 

11 
12 


EP 1 566 853 B1 

8 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

contact angle between polyimide and SOG or ITO large, 
and to achieve this purpose, it is sufficient that CF 4 is 
approximately 70% or more according to Fig. 4. For ex-
ample, the surface of the affinity bank layer is treated 
such that the contact angle to the thin film material solu-
tion is 30 degrees or less. And the surface of the non-
affinity bank layer is treated such that the contact angle 
to the thin film material solution is 40 degrees or more. 
[0053] According to the above, in the present embod-
iment, a reduced pressure plasma treatment or atmos-
pheric pressure plasma treatment is executed using flu-
orine compound as the introductory gas while mixing ox-
ygen at a predetermined ratio. In the case of capacity 
coupling type plasma treatment, for example, the above 
gas is supplied to a reaction chamber, a board having 
the bank formation face 100 is placed on one electrode, 
and an electric field is applied from a power supply. To 
apply energy to the reaction chamber, various known 
methods can be used, including a direct current anodiz-
ing method, a high frequency method, inductive coupling, 
capacity coupling, a microwave method and a method 
applying both an electric field and magnetic field. 
[0054] For example, when the bank formation face 100 
(bottom face of the concave portion 101) is formed with 
such a transparent electrode as ITO, and the affinity bank 
layer with SiO 2 , and the non-affinity bank layer with poly-
imide, the sequence of affinity for the thin film material 
solution 130 becomes 
bank formation &gt; = affinity bank layer &gt; non-affinity bank 
layer after the above surface treatment. 

Thin film formation step (Fig. 3 B -D): 

[0055] In the thin film formation step, the thin film ma-
terial solution is sequentially filled in the concave portions 
101 enclosed with the banks 101, to laminate the thin 
film layers. 
[0056] For the thin film material solution 130 applied 
to a display, organic semiconductor material, materials 
where a hole supply element is doped as a hole trans-
porting layer, or a material where an electron supply el-
ement is doped as an electron transporting layer, for ex-
ample, are used. To apply the thin film material solution 
130 to a color filter, color resin, for example, is used. 
[0057] The amount of thin film material solution to be 
filled is adjusted by the thickness of the layer which is 
formed at the position corresponding to the thin film layer. 
In the case of the thin film layer 131 at the lowest layer, 
the amount of the thin film material solution is adjusted 
such that the thickness after the solvent component is 
evaporated from the thin film solution by a heat treatment 
becomes roughly the same as the thickness of the affinity 
bank layer 111 (broken line in Fig. 3 B). For the thin film 
layers 132 -13n on the thin film layer 131, the amount 
of thin film material solution is adjusted such that the 
thickness after the solvent component is evaporated from 
the thin film material solution by a heat treatment be-
comes roughly the same as the total thickness of the non-

affinity bank layer 12x and the affinity bank layer 11x + 
1 formed at the corresponding position (Fig. 3 C and D). 
[0058] A method for filling the thin film material solution 
is preferably an ink jet method. If an ink jet method is 
used, any amount of fluid can be filled to any position, 
and the fluid can be filled by such a small device as a 
device used for a home printer. 
[0059] When the thin filmmaterial solution is filled by 
an ink jet method, the thin film material solution is heated 
to remove the solvent component. In order to eject a liquid 
from an ink jet type recording head, the viscosity normally 
must be several pc or less. Therefore an amount more 
than the amount required for the thickness of the final 
thin film layer is ejected. 
[0060] Immediately after ejection, the thin film material 
solution contacts the affinity bank layer which is posi-
tioned higher than the final thickness. As the solvent com-
ponent evaporates and the volume decreases by a heat 
treatment, the liquid level of the thin film material solution 
decreases while being pulled somewhat by the bank wall 
faces. When the liquid level comes to the non-affinity 
bank layer, the thin film material solution is repelled and 
the contact point between the thin film material solution 
and the wall faces shifts to the affinity bank layer, which 
is one layer below. In this way, the liquid level drops in 
steps, and when the volume of the thin film material so-
lution decreases down to a level near the thickness of 
the final thin film layer, then the contact point between 
the liquid level of the thin film material solution and the 
wall faces shifts to the boundary between the affinity bank 
layer located at the lowest position of the bank layers 
which the thin film material solution is contacting, and the 
non-affinity bank layer immediately above the affinity 
bank layer. 
[0061] The amount of the thin film material solution to 
be filled is set such that the volume of the thin film material 
solution after a heat treatment comes roughly to the total 
height of the non-affinity bank layer and the affinity bank 
layer located at the lowest layer when the thin film ma-
terial solution is filled. After the liquid level shifts to the 
boundary between the affinity bank layer located at the 
lowest layer and the non-affinity bank layer immediately 
above the affinity bank layer, the liquid level no longer 
drops. The thickness at the center of the thin film material 
solution gradually drops by the decrease in volume, and 
when the thickness becomes the same in all the portions 
from the part contacting the bank wall faces to the center 
part, the thin film layer solidifies and completes. 
[0062] In the thin film layer 131 at the lowest layer, for 
example, the thin film material solution 130 is ejected into 
the concave portion 101 enclosed with the banks 101 by 
the ink jet type recording head 102 up to the position 
shown by the broken line in Fig. 3 B. Then the thin film 
material solution becomes a flat thin film layer 131 by a 
heat treatment. In the thin film layer 132 above the thin 
film layer 131, the thin film material solution 130 is ejected 
on the thin film layer 131 by the ink jet type recording 
head 102 up to the position shown by the broken line in 

13 
14 


EP 1 566 853 B1 

9 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

Fig. 3 C. Then the thin film material solution becomes a 
flat thin film layer 132 by a heat treatment. These process-
ing steps are repeated until the thin film layer 13n is 
formed. 
[0063] The ink jet method may be a piezo-jet method 
or a method for ejecting by generating bubbles by heat, 
or a method for ejecting by electrostatic force. In the case 
of a piezo-jet method, the head is comprised of a nozzle 
and a piezoelectric element equipped in a pressure 
chamber. When voltage is applied to the piezoelectric 
element where fluid is filled in the pressure chamber, a 
volume change occurs in the pressure chamber and 
droplets of the fluid are ejected from the nozzle. In the 
case of a method for ejecting by generating bubbles, a 
heating element is disposed in a pressure chamber con-
nected to the nozzle of the head. When the heating ele-
ment is heated and fluid near the nozzle boils, bubbles 
are generated and the fluid is ejected by volume expan-
sion. The piezo-jet method is preferable since the fluid 
is not affected by heating. 
[0064] As mentioned above, in accordance with the 
first embodiment, each thin film layer can be formed flat. 
[0065] Also in accordance with the first embodiment, 
plasma treatment is executed under the condition where 
oxygen is mixed with fluorine compound, therefore non-
affinity of the bank surface, which is made of organic 
material, and affinity of the bank surface, which is made 
of inorganic material, and of the bank formation face for 
the thin film material solution can be adjusted. 
[0066] Also in accordance with the first embodiment, 
the contact angle to implement a degree of affinity ac-
cording to the characteristics shown in Fig. 4 can be eas-
ily set. That is, affinity between the banks and the bank 
formation face can be accurately controlled while main-
taining high adhesion between the banks and the bank 
formation face without going through numerous steps for 
affinity control, which is conventionally required. As a re-
sult, an overflow of the thin film material solution from the 
banks can be prevented, yield can be improved, and 
manufacturing cost can be decreased. 

(Second embodiment) 

[0067] Second embodiment of the present invention is 
layering banks in a method different from the above em-
bodiment. In this embodiment, just like the above first 
embodiment, banks are formed in any shape on the bank 
formation face, and is applied to various applications 
where a predetermined fluid is filled in areas enclosed 
with banks. For example, this embodiment can be applied 
when organic semiconductor material is filled in pixel ar-
eas of a display device using an organic semiconductor 
thin film device, or when color resin is filled in pixel areas 
of a color filter. 
[0068] Fig. 5 shows a cross-sectional view of manu-
facturing steps of the present embodiment. 

Lower layer film formation step (Fig. 5 A -C) 

[0069] In the lower layer film formation step, the affinity 
bank layer 111 is formed on the bank formation face 100. 
At first, inorganic material is coated in the same method 
as the above first embodiment (Fig. 5 A). Then a mask 
140 is formed on the inorganic material layer matching 
the bank shape (Fig. 5 B). Next the inorganic material 
layer is etched to remove inorganic material except for 
the area where the mask 140 is placed (Fig. 5 C). The 
etching method is selected according to the characteris-
tics of the material. In the case of an inorganic material, 
such as SiO 2 , not only dry etching but also wet etching 
using such an etchant as hydroflouric acid (HF) can be 
used. In this way, the affinity bank layer 111 at the lowest 
layer is formed. Then an organic material is coated in the 
same method as in the above embodiment (Fig. 5 D). 
Next a mask 142 is set on the organic material layer, 
matching the bank shape (Fig. 5 E). Then the organic 
material layer is etched and the organic material is re-
moved except for the area where the mask 141 is placed 
(Fig. 5 F). The etching method is selected according to 
the characteristics of the material. In the case of an or-
ganic material, such as polyimide, not only dry etching 
but also wet etching using such an etchant as NMP (N-
methyl pyrolidone) can be used. 
[0070] In this way, the non-affinity bank layer 121 is 
formed. Unlike the above first embodiment, in this em-
bodiment, the affinity bank layer is not etched using the 
non-affinity bank layer as a mask, but each top layer can 
be independently etched, therefore the bank shape in 
the affinity bank layer and the bank shape in the non-
affinity bank layer can be different. For example, it is pos-
sible to decrease the width of the bank as processing 
moves from lower to upper layers, to form a bank to be 
step shaped or taper shaped. If the banks are formed in 
this way, then the thin film material solution to be the thin 
film layer can be easily filled, and when the wiring pattern 
is formed over the banks, disconnection of the wiring can 
be prevented. By selecting an appropriate shape for the 
lower bank layer, an ideal thin film layer can be formed. 
Repeating the above steps (Fig. 5 A -F) for the required 
number of layering times (e.g. n times), the banks 110 
are formed, as shown in Fig. 5 G. 
[0071] Descriptions on the surface treatment step and 
the thin film layer formation step are omitted since they 
are the same as in the first embodiment. 
[0072] As described above, in accordance with the 
present second embodiment, not only are the same ef-
fects as in the first embodiment are implemented, but 
also an optimum shape of the thin film layer can be set 
for the application device, since the shape of each layer 
of the banks can be different. 

(Examples) 

[0073] The layer structure of examples when the above 
embodiment is applied will now be explained. 

15 
16 


EP 1 566 853 B1 

10 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

[0074] Fig. 6 is a cross-sectional view of an example 
when the present invention is applied to a color filter. In 
this color filter, the partition elements 210 are formed on 
a board 200 grid-like when viewed from the top, as shown 
in Fig. 6, and the color resins 231 -233 are filled in the 
pixel areas 201 enclosed with the partition elements 210. 
The board 200 corresponds to the bank formation face 
of the present invention, and is comprised of transparent 
material having good adhesion with the color resins, such 
as glass, quartz and resin. The partition elements 210 
correspond to the banks of the present invention, and a 
resin layer (or inorganic insulation film layer) 211 is 
formed as the affinity bank layer, and a black matrix layer 
221 is formed as the non-affinity bank layer. The resin 
layer (or insulation film layer) 211 is formed by molding 
resin in bank shapes. The black matrix layer 221 is 
formed by coating an inorganic material or an organic 
insulation material containing carbon. The color resin lay-
ers 231 (red), 232 (green) and 233 (blue), correspond to 
the thin film layers of the present invention, and are 
formed by filling resin mixing dies of primary colors, such 
as red, green and blue, in each pixel area 201. 
[0075] According to the above configuration, surface 
treatment is performed such that the resin layer (or insu-
lation film layer) 211 has affinity for the color resin, and 
surface treatment is performed such that the black matrix 
layer 221 has non-affinity for the color resin. Therefore 
when the color resin is filled by the ink jet method and 
heat treatment is executed, the color resin layers 231 -
233 are formed to be flat. As a result, image display with-
out uneven brightness and color can be implemented. 
[0076] Fig. 7 is a cross-sectional view of a layer struc-
ture of an example when the present invention is applied 
to an organic semiconductor light emitting element of a 
display. As Fig. 7 shows, transparent electrodes 341 and 
banks 310 are formed on the drive board 300 in this or-
ganic semiconductor light emitting element, and the or-
ganic semiconductor layer 331 is formed in the concave 
portions 301 enclosed with the banks 310. The metal 
electrodes 351 are formed on the entire surface. In the 
drive board 300, multiple layers of TFT, wiring and insu-
lation films are laminated, so that voltage can be applied 
between the transparent electrode 341 and the metal 
electrode 351. The transparent electrode 341 is formed 
by layering ITO, for example, to be 0.05Pm -0.2Pm, so 
as to transmit light from the organic semiconductor layer 
331 and the reflected light from the metal electrode 351. 
The bank 310 is comprised of the bottom layer 311 and 
the top layer 321. The bottom layer 311 is comprised of 
an inorganic material having affinity for the organic sem-
iconductor material, which is silicon oxide or silicon ni-
tride, for example, formed by CVD, sputtering or various 
coating methods. The top layer 321 is comprised of an 
organic material having non-affinity for the organic sem-
iconductor material, which is an organic compound con-
taining polyimide, amorphous silicon, polysilicon, or flu-
orine, or insulating organic compound. The organic sem-
iconductor layer 331 is comprised of a material which 

emits light when an electric field is applied, such as 
polyphnylene vinylene (PPV) or other known material, 
and is layered to be 0.05Pm -0.2Pm. The metal electrode 
351 is comprised of aluminum-lithium (Al -Li) and is lay-
ered to be 0.1Pm -1.0Pm 
[0077] According to the above configuration, surface 
treatment is performed such that the bottom layer 311 
has affinity for the organic semiconductor layer 331, and 
the top layer 321 has affinity for the organic semiconduc-
tor layer 331, therefore when the organic semiconductor 
material is filled by an ink jet method and heat treatment 
is executed, the organic semiconductor layer 331 is 
formed to be flat. As a result, image display without un-
even brightness and color and without missing colors can 
be implemented. Electrode shorting is also prevented, 
which improves reliability of the display and extends life. 
[0078] Fig. 8 is a cross-sectional view of the layer struc-
ture of another example when the present invention is 
applied to an organic semiconductor light emitting ele-
ment of a display. As Fig. 8 shows, in this organic sem-
iconductor light emitting element, transparent electrodes 
441 and banks 410 are formed on the drive board 400, 
and the hole transporting layer 431 and the semiconduc-
tor layer 432 are layered in the concave portions 401 
enclosed with the banks 410. The metal electrodes 451 
are formed on the entire surface. The drive board 400, 
the transparent electrode 441, the organic semiconduc-
tor layer 432 and the metal electrode 451 are the same 
as the above example shown in Fig. 7. The bank 410 is 
comprised of affinity layers 411 and 412 and non-affinity 
layer 421 and 422 which are alternately layered. The af-
finity layer 411 is comprised of an inorganic material hav-
ing affinity for the hole transporting material or the organic 
semiconductor material, which is silicon oxide or silicon 
nitride formed by CVD, sputtering or various coating 
methods. The non-affinity layer 421 is comprised of an 
organic material having non-affinity for the organic sem-
iconductor material, which is an organic compound con-
taining polyimide, amorphous silicon, polysilicon, or flu-
orine, or insulating organic compound. The hole trans-
porting layer 431 is comprised of a material which can 
transport holes from the transparent electrode 441, which 
is an anode, to the organic semiconductor layer 432, 
which is an ITO mixing hole supply element, for example. 
[0079] According to the above configuration, surface 
treatment is performed such that the affinity layer 411 
has affinity for the hole transporting layer 431, and sur-
face treatment is performed such that the affinity layer 
412 has affinity for the organic semiconductor layer 432. 
Also surface treatment is performed such that the non-
affinity layer 421 has non-affinity for the hole transporting 
layer 431 and the organic semiconductor layer 432. 
When the hole transporting layer 431 and the organic 
semiconductor layer 432 are filled by an ink jet method 
and heat treatment is executed, the respective layers are 
formed to be flat. As a result, image display without un-
even brightness and color and without missing colors can 
be implemented. Electrode shorting is also prevented, 

17 
18 


EP 1 566 853 B1 

11 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

which improves reliability of the display and extends life. 
[0080] The structures of the color filter and organic 
electroluminescence device are not restricted by the 
above examples, but can be changed in various ways. 
For example, in the organic electroluminiscence device, 
the electron transporting layer and the other organic sem-
iconductor layers may be layered. 

(Variant forms) 

[0081] The present invention is not restricted by the 
above embodiments, but the present invention may be 
applied in yet other ways without departing from the 
scope of the appended claims. 
[0082] For example, the affinity material, non-affinity 
material and the bank formation method using these ma-
terials can be modified in various ways without being re-
stricted by the above embodiments. This is because an 
essential feature of the present invention is forming the 
thin film layers without distortion by arranging layers hav-
ing different degrees of affinity alternately. For example, 
not only forming the banks by materials for banks 
which can form thick film, but the banks of the present 
invention may also be formed by coating a material hav-
ing affinity or a material having non-affinity on the bank 
surface. For example, diethylene glycol methyl ethyl 
ether (C 2 H 5 OCH 2 CH 2 CH 2 OCH 2 CH 2 OCH 3 ) or 2-fluoro 
octyl ethyl acrylete (FCF 28 CH 2 CH 2 000CH = CH 2 ) by it-
self represents non-affinity for a thin film material solution 
having polar group molecules. 
[0083] The above surface treatment is not restricted 
to plasma treatment but any surface treatment method 
which can treat surfaces for different affinities under the 
same surface treatment conditions, as shown in Fig. 4, 
can be used. This is because an essential feature of the 
present invention is adjusting affinity by surface treat-
ment. Therefore the materials for which affinity is set be-
tween is not restricted by an inorganic material and or-
ganic material, but the surface treatment of the present 
invention can be applied to specific materials between 
which affinity characteristics shown in Fig. 4 are exhibit-
ed. 
[0084] The above banks are not restricted by layered 
affinity materials and non-affinity materials. For example, 
the configuration of the present invention can be formed 
such that a single element is formed first, then the area 
having affinity for the thin film material solution and an 
area having non-affinity for the thin film material solution 
are formed alternately. For example, it is possible to form 
the bank material with an affinity material, where non-
affinity material is coated in stripes. For the non-affinity 
material, paraffin, for example, can be used rather than 
those materials of the above embodiments. It is also pos-
sible to form the bank material with a non-affinity material, 
where ultraviolet rays are irradiated in stripes to create 
affinity areas, or charger are removed in stripes and af-
finity material is coated utilizing charges. If a metal thin 
film is formed on the entire surface of the bank material, 

and is dipped into a sulfur compound having affinity sub-
stituents and a sulfur compound having non-affinity sub-
stituents sequentially from the bottom layer, then an af-
finity area and a non-affinity area can be formed in stripes 
by mono-molecular film. 

INDUSTRIAL APPLICABILITY 

[0085] In accordance with the thin film formation meth-
od of the present invention, thin film layers can be formed 
without distortion by layering different materials for 
banks. This improves performance and reliability of the 
device dramatically. 
[0086] Also in accordance with the thin film formation 
method of the present invention, affinity of the thin film 
can be controlled so as to be layered by executing surface 
treatment under predetermined conditions, without going 
through numerous steps for affinitycontrol. As a result, 
cost required for affinity control can be decreased, and 
films with uniform film thickness can be layered for the 
thin film. 
[0087] In accordance with the display of the present 
invention, the thin film is layered by the thin film formation 
method which can form multi-layer thin film, therefore 
thin film layers with uniform thickness can be layered. As 
a result, image display without uneven brightness and 
color and without missing color can be implemented. 
Electrode shorting is also prevented, which improves re-
liability and extends life of the display. 
[0088] In accordance with the color filter of the present 
invention, the thin film is layered by the thin film formation 
method which can form multi-layer thin film. Therefore 
thin film layers with uniform thickness can be layered. As 
a result, an image display without uneven brightness and 
color can be implemented. 

Claims 

1. A substrate structure, comprising: 

a substrate (100); 
a plurality of thin film layers (131-13n) laminated 
on the substrate; and 
a bank (110) enclosing an area in which the plu-
rality of thin film layers (131-13n) are arranged, 
the bank (110) including a first bank layer (111), 
a second bank layer (121) and a third bank layer 
(112), the second bank layer (121) being dis-
posed between the first (111) and third (112) 
bank layers, the first (111) and third (112) bank 
layers being made from one of an inorganic ma-
terial and an organic material, the second bank 
layer (121) being made from the other of the 
inorganic material and the organic material, the 
first (111) and third (112) bank layers having af-
finity to the thin film layers and the second bank 
layer (121) having non-affinity for the thin film 

19 
20 


EP 1 566 853 B1 

12 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

layers. 

2. The substrate according to claim 1, the bank (110) 
comprising alternately an affinity bank layer 
(111-11n) having affinity for the thin film layers 
(131-13n) and a non-affinity bank layer (121-12n) 
having non-affinity for the thin film layers (131-13n). 

3. The substrate according to claim 1, wherein the de-
gree of affinity of the affinity bank layer against a 
liquid material of the thin film layers used in a liquid 
process is greater than that of the non-affinity bank 
layer. 

4. The substrate according to claim 3, wherein the liquid 
material comprises polar molecules. 

5. The substrate according to claim 3, wherein the liquid 
material comprises molecules non-polar molecules. 

6. The substrate according to claim 2, at least one of 
the affinity bank layer and the non-affinity bank layer 
being surface-treated so as to have affinity or non-
affinity, respectively. 

7. The substrate according to claim 2, the affinity bank 
layer including an organic material. 

8. The substrate according to claim 2, the affinity bank 
layer including an inorganic material. 

9. The substrate according to claim 2, the non-affinity 
bank layer including an organic material. 

10. The substrate according to claim 2, the non-affinity 
bank layer including an inorganic material. 

11. The substrate according to claims 3, 7 or 9, wherein 
the affinity bank layer is treated with plasma 

12. The substrate according to claims 7 or 9, the organic 
material including an organic compound containing 
polyimide, amorphous silicon, polysilicon or fluorine, 
or an insulating organic compound. 

13. The substrate according to claims 8 or 10, the inor-
ganic material including A1, Ta, silicon oxide or sili-
con nitride. 

14. The substrate according to claim 2, a thickness of 
the first thin layer being set to be the substantially 
the same thickness as the affinity bank layer at the 
lowest layer of the bank. 

15. The substrate according to claim 14, a thickness of 
each thin film layer which is layered on the first thin 
film being set to be substantially the same thickness 
as the respective total thickness of the affinity bank 

layer and the non-affinity bank layer which are lay-
ered to the height corresponding to the bank. 

16. The substrate according to claim 15, the thickness 
of the non-affinity bank layer at the top layer being 
set to be 500 nm or less, and the thickness of the 
other non-affinity bank layer being set to be 100 nm 
or less. 

17. The substrate according to claim 1, the thin film lay-
ers including an organic semiconductor. 

18. The substrate according to claim 1, the thin film lay-
ers including a color filter. 

19. The substrate according to claim 1, wherein the first 
and third bank layers are made of the same material. 

20. The substrate according to claim 1, wherein the 
thickness of the first thin film layer is the same as 
the thickness of the first bank layer, and wherein the 
thickness of the second thin film layer is the same 
as the total thickness of the first and the third bank 
layers. 

EP 1 566 853 B1 

21 


EP 1 566 853 B1 

22 


EP 1 566 853 B1 

23 

REFERENCES IN THE DESCRIPTION 

This list of references cited by the applicant is for the reader's convenience only. It does not form part of the European 
patent document. Even though great care has been taken in compiling the references, errors or omissions cannot be 
excluded and the EPO disclaims all liability in this regard. 

Patent documents cited in the description 

• 
JP 9203803 A [0005] 
• 
JP 9230129 A [0005] [0006] 

• 
EP 0940797 A [0009] 

Non-patent literature cited in the description 

• 
International Display Research Conference, 1997, 
238-241 [0005] 



	

