
	

		

	

	

Note: Within nine months from the publication of the mention of the grant of the European patent, any person may give 
notice to the European Patent Office of opposition to the European patent granted. Notice of opposition shall be filed in 
a written reasoned statement. It shall not be deemed to have been filed until the opposition fee has been paid. (Art. 
99(1) European Patent Convention). 

Printed by Jouve, 75001 PARIS (FR) 

(19) 

EP 0 973 538 B1 

(Cont. next page) 

&amp; 

(11) 

EP 0 973 538 B1 

(12) 

EUROPEAN PATENT SPECIFICATION 

(45) Date of publication and mention 
of the grant of the patent: 
12.03.2008 Bulletin 2008/11 

(21) Application number: 98914585.9 

(22) Date of filing: 08.04.1998 

(51) Int Cl.: 
A61K 38/00 (2006.01) 
A61K 38/17 (2006.01) 
C07K 1/00 (2006.01) 
C07K 5/00 (2006.01) 
C07K 7/00 (2006.01) 
C12N 5/00 (2006.01) 

(86) International application number: 
PCT/US1998/006936 

(87) International publication number: 
WO 1998/044938 (15.10.1998 Gazette 1998/41) 

(54) MODIFIED PROTEINS WHICH BIND EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX COMPONENTS 

SICH AN EXTRAZELLULÄRE MATRIXBESTANDTEILE ANBINDENDE MODIFIZIERTE PROTEINE 

PROTEINES MODIFIEES SE FIXANT A DES COMPOSANTS DE MATRICE EXTRACELLULAIRES 

(84) Designated Contracting States: 
AT BE CH DE DK ES FI FR GB GR IE IT LI LU MC 
NL PT SE 

(30) Priority: 10.04.1997 US 837223 

(43) Date of publication of application: 
26.01.2000 Bulletin 2000/04 

(73) Proprietor: UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN 
CALIFORNIA 
Los Angeles, CA 90033 (US) 

(72) Inventors: 
• HALL, Frederick, L. 
Glendale, CA 91203 (US) 
• GORDON, Erlinda, Maria 
Glendale, CA 91203 (US) 
• ANDERSON, W., French 
San Marino, CA 91108 (US) 
• STARNES, Vaughn, A. 
Pasadena, CA 91107 (US) 

(74) Representative: Schüssler, Andrea et al 
Kanzlei Huber &amp; Schüssler 
Truderinger Strasse 246 
81825 München (DE) 

(56) References cited: 
EP-A-0 334 301 
WO-A-94/06920 
WO-A-96/30504 
WO-A-96/31602 
US-A-5 328 470 
US-A-5 354 674 
US-A-5 512 421 
US-A-5 591 624 
US-A-5 643 770 

• KOZAK S L ET AL: "PING-PONG AMPLIFICATION 
OF A RETROVIRAL VECTOR ACHIEVES HIGH-
LEVEL GENE EXPRESSION: HUMAN GROWTH 
HORMONE PRODUCTION" JOURNAL OF 
VIROLOGY, US, NEW YORK, US, vol. 64, no. 7, 1 
July 1990 (1990-07-01), pages 3500-3508, 
XP000616127 ISSN: 0022-538X 
• VALSESIA-WITTMANN S ET AL: "IMPROVEMENT 
OF RETROVIRAL RETARGETING BY USING 
AMINO ACID SPACERS BETWEEN AN 
ADDITIONAL BINDING DOMAIN AND THE N 
TERMINUS OF MOLONEY MURINE LEUKEMIA 
VIRUS SU" JOURNAL OF VIROLOGY, US, THE 
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR MICROBIOLOGY, vol. 
70, no. 3, 1 March 1996 (1996-03-01), pages 
2059-2064, XP000613624 ISSN: 0022-538X 
• HALL F L ET AL: "Targeting retroviral vectors to 
vascular lesions by genetic engineering of the 
MoMLV gp70 envelope protein" HUMAN GENE 
THERAPY, vol. 8, no. 18, 10 December 1997 
(1997-12-10), pages 2183-2192, XP002116930 
ISSN: 1043-0342 
• NEDA et al., "Chemical Modification of an 
Ecotropic Murine Leukemia Virus Results in 
Redirection of its Target Cell Specificity", THE 
JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY, 05 
August 1991, Vol. 266, No. 22, pages 14143-14146, 
XP002912706 
• KASAHARA et al., "Tissue-Specific Targeting of 
Retroviral Vectors Through Ligand-Receptor 
Interactions", SCIENCE, 25 November 1994, Vol. 
266, pages 1373-1376, XP002912707 


2 

EP 0 973 538 B1 

• XIE et al., "Elements Within the First 17 Amino 
Acids of Human Osteonectin Are Responsible for 
Binding to Type V Collagen", THE JOURNAL OF 
BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY, 05 April 1996, Vol. 
271, No. 14, pages 8121-8125, XP002912708 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

3 

5 





















Description 

[0001] This invention relates to a protein or polypeptide which is a modified retroviral envelope polypeptide. This 
invention further relates to "targeted" retroviral vector particles. More particularly, this invention relates to retroviral vector 
particles, having a modified retroviral envelope polypeptide that includes a targeting polypeptide including a binding 
region which binds to an extracellular matrix component. The targeting polypeptide may be placed between two con-
secutive amino acid residues of the viral surface protein, or may replace amino acid residues which have been removed 
from the viral surface protein. The term "polypeptide" as used herein means a polymer of amino acids and does not 
refer to any particular length of polymer. Such term also includes post-translationally modified polypeptides or proteins 
(e.g., glycosylated, acetylated, phosphorylated, ect.). 

BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION 

[0002] Retroviral vector particles are useful agents for introducing polynucleotides into cells, such as eukaryotic cells. 
The term "introducing" as used herein encompasses a variety of methods of transferring polynucleotides into a cell, such 
methods including transformation, transduction, transfection, and transinfection. 
[0003] Retroviruses typically have three common open reading frames, gag, pol, and env, which encode the structural 
proteins, encode enzymes including reverse transcriptase, and encode envelope proteins, respectively. Typically, ret-
roviral vector particles are produced by packaging cell lines that provide the necessary gag, pol, and env gene products 
in trans. (Miller, et al., Human Gene Therapy, vol. 1, pgs. 5-14 (1990)). This approach results in the production of retroviral 
vector particles which transduce mammalian cells, but are incapable of further replication after they have integrated into 
the genome of the cell. 
[0004] Thus, retroviral vector particles have been used for introducing polynucleotides into cells for gene therapy 
purposes. In one approach, cells are obtained from a patient, and retroviral vector particles are used to introduce a 
desired polynucleotide into the cells, and such modified cells are returned to the patient with the engineered cells for a 
therapeutic purpose. In another approach, retroviral vector particles may be administered to the patient in vivo, whereby 
the retroviral vector particles transduce cells of the patient in vivo. 
[0005] While the initial applications of human gene therapy have been performed in accessible sites and in target cells 
that are manipulated readily ex vivo, it is anticipated that future gene therapy protocols will describe systemic delivery 
of recombinant vectors for a wide variety of cardiovascular and other diseases. (Ledley, et al., Molecular Genetics and 
Gene Therapy of Cardiovascular Disease, Mockrin, ed., Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, pgs. 467-485 (1995); Nabel, 
Circulation, Vol. 91, pgs. 541-548 (1995)). Development of the technologies associated with tissue targeting will expand 
greatly the scope of gene therapy in cardiovascular and other fields of medicine. The effectiveness of retroviral vectors 
for gene delivery to cardiovascular and other tissues is limited by the inefficiency of gene transfer into intact vascular 
endothelium, the inactivation of retroviral vectors in vivo, and by the inability to localize effective vector concentrations 
at remote physiological sites. Thus, the use of retroviral vectors in vivo for gene delivery to cardiovascular and other 
tissues depends upon effective viral titer, stability, tissue targeting, and the ability to transduce vascular cells. Presently, 
the targeted delivery of the therapeutic genes to impaired, diseased, or transplanted vasculature remains a major chal-
lenge in the development of gene therapy protocols for cardiovascular disease. 
[0006] WO-A-94/06920 concerns recombinant viruses displaying a nonviral polypeptide on their external surface. 
[0007] WO-A-96/30504 concerns a retroviral vector particle having a modified envelope polypeptide wherein a portion 
of the receptor binding region of the envelope is replaced with a targeting polypeptide which binds to a ligand or a 
receptor on the targeted cells. 
[0008] WO-A-96/31602 concerns a proteinaceous particle comprising a capsid enveloped by ecotropic Murine Leuke-
mia virus envelope proteins. 

SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION 

[0009] Targeting of retroviral vectors can be divided into four separate processes: (i) delivery of concentrated viral 
particles; (ii) docking of the virus to the target cell; (iii) internalization of the viral core; and (iv) expression of the desired 
transgene. (Salmons, et al., Human Gene Therapy, Vol. 4, pgs. 129-141 (1993)). In contrast to previous approaches for 
achieving tissue targeting by genetic engineering of the retroviral envelope protein to incorporate polypeptide ligands to 
cellular receptors (Kasahara, et al., Science, Vol. 266, pgs. 1373-1376 (1994); Valseria-Wittmann, et al., J. Virol., Vol. 
68, pgs. 4609-4619 (1994)) or single chain antibodies that recognize cell specific antigens (Russell, Nucl. Acids Res., 
Vol. 21, pgs. 1081-1085 (1993); Cosset, et al., J. Virol., Vol. 69, pgs. 6314-6322 (1995); Somia, et al., Proc. Nat. Acad. 
Sci., Vol. 92, pgs. 7570-7574 (1995), the present invention is directed to retroviral vectors, which are designed to utilize 
the basic biology of wound healing to concentrate the delivery of therapeutic genes to sites of tissue injury. More 
particularly, the present invention is directed to retroviral vector particles, having a modified viral surface protein, wherein 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

4 

5 





















the viral surface protein, which is a retroviral envelope polypeptide, has been modified to include a targeting polypeptide 
which includes a binding region which binds to an extracellular matrix component, whereby the targeting of the retroviral 
vectors to an extracellular matrix component improves the specificity and/or local concentration of the vectors. The term 
"extracellular matrix component", as used herein, means a molecule that occupies the extracellular spaces of tissues. 

BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS 

[0010] The invention now will be described with respect to the drawings, wherein: 

Figure 1A is a schematic of the receptor binding region of ecotropic gp70 protein (SEQ ID NO: 1), showing the 
insertion of a polypeptide including a collagen-binding domain between amino acid residues 18 and 19; 
Figure 1B is a schematic of the envelope structure and cloning strategy employed to insert a collagen-binding 
polypeptide flanked by linker amino acid residues into the unique BstEII site within the N-terminal region of ecotropic 
gp70 protein; 
Figure 2A is a schematic diagram of the Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus envelope protein identifying the surface 
(SU) and transmembrane (TM) polypeptides, as well as the signal peptide, auxiliary collagen-binding domain, mem-
brane spanning and R peptide regions; 
Figure 2B shows an SDS-PAGE demonstrating the expression, purification, and renaturation of a chimeric envelope 
protein including a collagen-binding domain; 
Figure 2C shows the binding of the renatured recombinant chimeric envelope protein in collagen-coated microtiter 
wells; 
Figure 3A shows mock transfected (control) GPL cells that exhibit no positive staining for gp70 envelope protein; 
Figure 3B shows GPL cells transfected with CEE+, which expresses wild-type gp70; 
Figure 3C shows GPL cells transfected with chimeric ECB-CEE+ plasmid DNA; 
Figure 3D is a Western Blot showing co-migration of the chimeric ECB-CEE+ envelope protein with wild-type CEE+ 
envelope protein, as well as co-migration of the gag proteins in the 30 kda region; 
Figure 3E shows selective binding of chimeric viruses to collagen matrices in microtiter wells; 
Figure 4A shows a cell culture plate showing positive staining for β-galactosidase in cultures transduced with viruses 
bearing the chimeric ECB-CEE+ envelope protein, and negative staining in cultures transduced with wild-type CEE+, 
and in non-transduced cultures; 
Figure 4B shows NIH 3T3 cells at high magnification expressing β-galactosidase after transduction by the collagen-
bound vector bearing the chimeric ECB-CEE+ envelope; 
Figure 4C is a graph of the transduction efficiency of viruses bearing the chimeric ECB-CEE+ protein in the presence 
of normal human serum; 
Figure 5A shows an untreated catheter-injured segment of mouse aorta; 
Figure 5B shows a higher magnification of a portion of the catheter-injured segment shown in Figure 5A; 
Figure 5C depicts binding of the ECB-CEE+ chimeric envelope protein to an injured segment of mouse aorta; 
Figure 5D shows the absence of binding of the ECB-CEE+ chimeric envelope protein to a non-injured segment of 
mouse aorta; 
Figure 5E shows binding of the ECB-CEE+ chimeric envelope protein to an injured inferior vena cava segment; 
Figure 5F shows in vivo transduction of chondrocytes by an ECB-CEE+ virus as demonstrated by expression of 
nuclear targeted β-galactosidase after injection of vector supernatant into the tail of a newborn mouse; 
Figure 6A shows the gross appearance of a segment of the left common carotid artery (dissected longitudinally) of 
a rat at 9 days after balloon catheter injury and 2 days after instillation of ECB-CEE+ vector supernatant (titer: 8 x 
10 5 cfu/ml). The bracketed area shows the actual site of vascular injury and in vivo transduction. The arterial segment 
to the right of the bracketed area was not injured but was exposed to the same vector. A short segment of the right 
carotid artery is shown (lower right) as a non-injured, untreated control; 
Figure 6B shows low power (10x) magnification of a formalin-fixed longitudinal section of an injured rat common 
carotid artery, following x-gal staining. Numerous cells (arrows) with blue-staining nuclei are noted along the length 
of the tunica media; 
Figure 6C shows high power magnification of a segment of arterial wall (bracketed area in Figure 6B) showing 
smooth muscle cells expressing the nuclear-targeted β-galactosidase transgene (arrows point to cells with prominent 
blue nuclei); 
Figure 7 is a Western Blot of cell lysates of 293T cells infected with the retrioval vectors CEE+, ECB-CEE+, CAE, 
ECB-CEE+CAE, or mock-infected (control); 
Figure 8 shows the results of fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) of 293T cells infected with CEE+, ECB-
CEE+, CAE, ECB-CEE+. CAE, or mock-infected (control); 
Figure 9 shows the results of fluorescence-activated cell sorting of 293T cells and CH010 cells infected with CEE+, 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

5 

5 





















ECB-CEE+, CAE, ECB-CEE+CAE, or mock-infected (control); 
Figure 10 shows the results of an ELISA assay for collagen-binding affinity of the CAB and ECB-CEE+.CAE vectors; 
Figure 11 shows sections of the left common carotid arteries of mice which were treated either with the retrovial 
vector CAE or the retrovial vector ECB-CEB+, CAE; 
Figure 12 shows sections of injured human saphenous vein segments treated with CAE or ECB-CEE+, CAE; and 
Figures 13A and B show human atherosclerotic plaques treated with the chimeric envelope protein SU-ECB-CEE+ 
or buffer (control), respectively. 

DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE INVENTION 

[0011] In accordance with an aspect of the present invention, there is provided a retroviral vector particle having a 
modified viral surface protein, which is a modified retroviral envelope polypeptide or protein, for targeting the vector 
particle to an extracellular matrix component. The viral surface protein is modified to include a targeting polypeptide 
including a binding region which binds to an extracellular matrix component. 
[0012] Vector particles which have a modified surface protein include any retroviral vector particle which may be 
employed for gene transfer to cells in vivo, ex vivo, or in vitro, or for gene therapy. The targeting polypeptide may be 
placed in any region of any viral surface protein. The targeting polypeptide, in one embodiment, may be placed between 
two consecutive amino acid residues of a viral surface protein. Alternatively, amino acid residues of a viral surface protein 
are removed and replaced with the targeting polypeptide. 
[0013] In one embodiment, the viral vector particle is a retroviral vector particle. Any portion of the retroviral envelope 
may be modified to include the targeting polypeptide. In one embodiment, the receptor binding region of the retroviral 
envelope is modified to include the targeting polypeptide. 
[0014] In one embodiment, the targeting polypeptide is inserted between two consecutively numbered amino acid 
residues of the native (i.e., unmodified) receptor binding region of the retroviral envelope. In another embodiment, amino 
acid residues of the receptor binding region may be removed and replaced with the targeting polypeptide. In one em-
bodiment, prior to modification, the receptor binding region has the sequence (SEQ ID NO: 1), which is the receptor 
binding region of an ecotropic retroviral envelope. In the modified envelope polypeptide, the targeting polypeptide is 
inserted between amino acid residues 18 and 19 of (SEQ ID NO: 1). In another embodiment, in the modified envelope 
polypeptide, the targeting polypeptide is inserted between amino acid residues 6 and 7 of (SEQ ID NO: 1). 
[0015] The polypeptide (SEQ ID NO: 1) is a portion of a protein known as gp70, which is included in the ecotropic 
envelope of Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus. In general, gp70 protein includes the following regions: (i) the secretory 
signal or "leader" sequence; (ii) the receptor binding region; (iii) the hinge region; and (iv) the body portion. (SEQ ID NO: 
1) is the receptor binding region of the ecotropic envelope of Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus. Applicants have found 
that retroviruses can be made "targetable" to an extracellular matrix component if the receptor binding region is modified 
such that the receptor binding region includes a polypeptide which binds to an extracellular matrix component. 
[0016] As an alternative to modifying the receptor binding region, or in addition to the modified receptor binding region, 
the retroviral particles may have modifications in other regions of the envelope protein such that other regions of the 
envelope may include the targeting polypeptide, such as, for example, the secretory signal or "leader" sequence, the 
hinge region, or the body portion. Such modifications may include deletions or substitutions of amino acid residues in 
the retroviral envelope wherein amino acid residues from regions other than the receptor binding region of the envelope 
are removed and replaced with the targeting polypeptide, or the targeting polypeptide is placed between consecutively 
numbered amino acid residues of regions other than the receptor binding region of the viral envelope. 
[0017] In another alternative embodiment, the retroviral envelope, prior to modification thereof to include the targeting 
polypeptide which binds to the extracellular matrix component, may be an envelope which includes regions of different 
tropisms. For example, the retroviral envelope may be a Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus envelope which includes a 
gp70 protein having an ecotropic portion and an amphotropic and/or xenotropic portion. 
[0018] In another embodiment, the retroviral vector particle includes a first retroviral envelope and a second retroviral 
envelope. Each of the first retroviral envelope and the second retroviral envelope includes a surface protein. The surface 
protein includes (i) a receptor binding region; (ii) a hypervariable polyproline, or "hinge" region; and (iii) a body portion. 
The receptor binding region, hypervariable polyproline region, and body portion are retained in the first retroviral envelope, 
which in general, is free of non-retroviral peptides. In the second retroviral envelope, a targeting polypeptide including 
a binding region which binds to an extracellular matrix component, as hereinabove described, is inserted betgween two 
contiguous amino acid residues of the surface protein. 
[0019] The first retroviral envelope may be an amphotropic envelope, an ecotropic envelope, or a xenotropic envelope. 
Alternatively, the first retgroviral envelope may include regions of different tropisms. For example, in one embodiment, 
the first retroviral envelope may include a surface protein which includes (i) an ecotropic receptor binding region; (ii) an 
amphotropic hypervariable polyproline region; and (iii) an ecotropic body portion. 
[0020] The second retroviral envelope may be an amphotropic envelope, an ecotropic envelope, or a xenotropic 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

6 

5 





















envelope, or an envelope having different tropisms, as hereinabove described. 
[0021] In one embodiment, the targeting polypeptide is placed between two consecutively numbered amino acid 
residues of the receptor binding region of the retroviral envelope. In one embodiment, the receptor binding region of the 
second retroviral envelope has the sequence (SEQ ID NO: 1), which is the receptor binding region of an ecotropic 
retroviral envelope as hereinabove described. In the second retroviral envelope, the targeting polypeptide is inserted 
between amino acid residues 18 and 19 of (SEQ ID NO: 1). In another embodiment, in the second retroviral envelope, 
the targeting polypeptide is inserted between amino acid residues 6 and 7 of (SEQ ID NO: 1) . 
[0022] As an alternative, inserting the targeting polypeptide in the receptor binding region of the second retroviral 
envelope, the targeting polypeptide may be inserted in other regions of the envelope, such as the hinge region or the 
body portion. 
[0023] In general, the targeting polypeptide includes a binding region which binds to an extracellular matrix component, 
which is collagen (including collagen Type I and collagen Type IV). Binding regions which may be included in the targeting 
polypeptide include, but are not limited to, polypeptide domains which are functional domains within von Willebrand 
Factor or derivatives thereof, wherein such polypeptide domains bind to collagen. In one embodiment, the binding region 
is a polypeptide having the following structural formula. Trp-Arg-Glu-Pro-Ser-Phe-Met-Ala-Leu-Ser. (SEQ ID NO: 3). 
[0024] Other binding regions which may be included in the viral envelope, include but are not limited to, the arginine-
glycine-aspartic acid, or RGD, sequence, which binds fibronectin, and a polypeptide having the sequence Gly-Gly-Trp-
Ser-His-Trp, which also binds to fibronectin. 
[0025] In addition to the binding region, the targeting polypeptide may further include linker sequences of one or more 
amino acid residues, placed at the N-terminal and/or C-terminal of the binding region, whereby such linkers increase 
rotational flexibility and/or minimize steric hindrance of the modified envelope polypeptide. 
[0026] It is to be understood, however, that the scope of the present invention is not to be limited to any specific 
targeting polypeptide or binding region. 
[0027] In accordance with another aspect of the present invention, there is provided a modified polynucleotide encoding 
a modified viral surface protein for targeting a vector to an extracellular matrix component. Such polynucleotide includes 
a polynucleotide encoding a targeting polypeptide including a binding region which binds to an extracellular matrix 
component. The vector and modified viral surface protein may be selected from those hereinabove described. 
[0028] In one embodiment, the vector is a retroviral vector, and the modified viral surface protein is a modified retroviral 
envelope polypeptide. The envelope polypeptide includes a receptor binding region. In one embodiment, in the modified 
polynucleotide, the polynucleotide encoding the receptor binding region is modified to include a polynucleotide encoding 
a targeting polypeptide including a binding region which binds to an extracellular matrix component. 
[0029] In one embodiment, prior to modification, the polynucleotide encoding the receptor binding region encodes a 
receptor binding region having the sequence (SEQ ID NO: 1). In the modified polynucleotide, the polynucleotide encoding 
the targeting polypeptide is inserted between the codon encoding amino acid residue 18 and the codon encoding amino 
acid residue 19 of (SEQ ID NO: 1). In another embodiment, in the modified polynucleotide, the polynucleotide encoding 
the targeting polypeptide is inserted between the codon encoding amino acid residue 6 and the codon encoding amino 
acid residue 7 of (SEQ ID NO: 1). The receptor binding region having the sequence (SEQ ID NO: 1) is encoded by the 
polynucleotide having (SEQ ID NO: 2) or a derivative or analogue thereof. 
[0030] The term "derivative or analogue thereof" as used herein means that the polynucleotide encoding the polypeptide 
(SEQ ID NO: 1) may have a sequence different from the polynucleotide (SEQ ID NO: 2), yet encode the same polypeptide. 
Such differences in polynucleotide sequences may, for example, be due to the degeneration of the genetic code. It is 
also contemplated within the scope of the present invention that, prior to the modification of (SEQ ID NO: 2) with a 
polynucleotide encoding a targeting polypeptide, (SEQ ID NO: 2) may be modified such that one or more codons are 
changed such that the codons modify different amino acid residues than the unmodified sequences. Such modifications 
may facilitate the insertion of the polynucleotide encoding the targeting polypeptide. 
[0031] The above polynucleotides may be constructed by genetic engineering techniques known to those skilled in 
the art. For example, a first expression plasmid may be constructed which includes a polynucleotide encoding the 
unmodified envelope. The plasmid then is engineered such that a polynucleotide encoding the targeting polypeptide is 
inserted between two codons encoding consecutively numbered amino acid residues of the unmodified envelope, or is 
engineered such that a polynucleotide encoding a portion of the unmodified envelope is removed, whereby such portion 
may be replaced with a polynucleotide encoding the targeting polypeptide. The polynucleotide encoding the targeting 
polypeptide may be contained in a second expression plasmid or may exist as a naked polynucleotide sequence. The 
polynucleotide encoding the targeting polypeptide or the plasmid containing such polynucleotide is cut at appropriate 
restriction enzyme sites and cloned into the first expression plasmid which also has been cut at appropriate restriction 
enzyme sites. The resulting expression plasmid thus includes a polynucleotide encoding the modified envelope protein. 
Such polynucleotide then may be cloned out of the expression plasmid, and into a retroviral plasmid vector. The resulting 
retroviral plasmid vector, which includes the polynucleotide encoding the modified envelope protein, and which also may 
include a polynucleotide encoding a heterologous protein or peptide, is transfected into an appropriate packaging cell 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

7 

5 





















line to form a producer cell line for generating retroviral vector particles including the modified envelope protein. Alter-
natively, a naked polynucleotide sequence encoding the modified envelope protein is transfected into a "pre-packaging" 
cell line including nucleic acid sequences encoding the gag and pol proteins, thereby forming a packaging cell line, or 
is transfected into a packaging cell line including nucleic acid sequences encoding the gag, pol, and wild-type (i.e., 
unmodified) env proteins, thereby forming a packaging cell line including nucleic acid sequences encoding wild-type 
env protein and the modified envelope protein. Such packaging cells then may be transfected with a retroviral plasmid 
vector, which may include a nucleic acid sequence encoding a heterologous protein or peptide, thereby forming a 
producer cell line for generating retroviral vector particles including the modified envelope protein. Such a polynucleotide 
thus may be contained in the above-mentioned retroviral vector particle, or in a producer cell for generating the above-
mentioned retroviral vector particle. 
[0032] The term "polynucleotide" as used herein means a polymeric form (s) of nucleotide (s) of any length, and includes 
ribonucleotides and/or deoxyribonucleotides. Such term also includes single-and double-stranded DNA, as well as 
single-and double-stranded RNA. The term also includes modified polynucleotides such as methylated or capped 
polynucleotides. 
[0033] In a preferred embodiment, the vector particle having a modified envelope in accordance with the invention 
includes a polynucleotide encoding a heterologous polypeptide which is to be expressed in a desired cell. The heterol-
ogous polypeptide may, in one embodiment, be a therapeutic agent. The term "therapeutic" is used in a generic sense 
and includes treating agents, prophylactic agents, and replacement agents. 
[0034] Examples of therapeutic agents include, but are not limited to, cell cycle control agents, agents which inhibit 
cyclin proteins, such as antisense polynucleotides to the cyclin G1 and cyclin D1 genes, growth factors such as, for 
example, epidermal growth factor (EGF), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), erythropoietin, G-CSF, GM-CSF, 
TGF-α, TGF-β, and fibroblast growth factor, cytokines, including, but not limited to, Interleukins 1 through 13 and tumor 
necrosis factors, anticoagulants, anti-platelet agents, anti-inflammatory agents, tumor suppressor proteins, clotting fac-
tors, including Factor VIII and Factor IX, protein S, protein C, antithrombin III, von Willebrand Factor, cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), and negative selective markers such as Herpes Simplex Virus thymidine 
kinase. 
[0035] It is to be understood, however, that the scope of the present invention is not to be limited to any particular 
therapeutic agent. 
[0036] The polynucleotide encoding the therapeutic agent is under the control of a suitable promoter. Suitable pro-
moters which may be employed include, but are not limited to, the retroviral LTR; the SV40 promoter; the cytomegalovirus 
(CMV) promoter; the Rous Sarcoma Virus (RSV) promoter; the histone promoter; the polIII promoter, the β-actin promoter; 
inducible promoters, such as the MMTV promoter, the metallothionein promoter; heat shock promoters; adenovirus 
promoters; the albumin promoter; the ApoAI promoter; B19 parvovirus promoters; human globin promoters; viral thymi-
dine kinase promoters, such as the Herpes Simplex Virus thymidine kinase promoter; retroviral LTRs; human growth 
hormone promoters, and the MxIFN inducible promoter. The promoter also may be the native promoter which controls 
the polynucleotide encoding the therapeutic agent. It is to be understood, however, that the scope of the present invention 
is not to be limited to specific foreign genes or promoters. 
[0037] The polynucleotides encoding the modified envelope polypeptide and the therapeutic agent may be placed 
into an appropriate vector by genetic engineering techniques known to those skilled in the art. When the modified vector 
is a retroviral vector particle, the polynucleotides encoding the modified envelope polypeptide and the therapeutic agent 
are placed into an appropriate retroviral plasmid vector. 
[0038] In one embodiment, the retroviral plasmid vector may be derived from Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus and is 
of the LN series of vectors, such as those hereinabove mentioned, and described further in Bender, et al., J. Virol., Vol. 
61, pgs. 1639-1649 (1987) and Miller, et al., Biotechniques, Vol. 7, pgs 980-990 (1989). Such vectors have a portion of 
the packaging signal derived from a mouse sarcoma virus, and a mutated gag initiation codon. The term "mutated" as 
used herein means that the gag initiation codon has been deleted or altered such that the gag protein or fragments or 
truncations thereof, are not expressed. 
[0039] In another embodiment, the retroviral plasmid vector may include at least four cloning, or restriction enzyme 
recognition sites, wherein at least two of the sites have an average frequency of appearance in eukaryotic genes of less 
than once in 10,000 base pairs; i.e., the restriction product has an average DNA size of at least 10,000 base pairs. 
Preferred cloning sites are selected from the group consisting of NotI, SnaBI, SalI, and XhoI. In a preferred embodiment, 
the retroviral plasmid vector includes each of these cloning sites. Such vectors are further described in U.S. Patent No. 
5,672,510. 
[0040] When a retroviral plasmid vector including such cloning sites is employed, there may also be provided a shuttle 
cloning vector which includes at least two cloning sites which are compatible with at least two cloning sites selected 
from the group consisting of NotI, SnaBI, SalI, and XhoI located on the retroviral plasmid vector. The shuttle cloning 
vector also includes at least one desired polynucleotide encoding a therapeutic agent which is capable of being transferred 
from the shuttle cloning vector to the retroviral plasmid vector. 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

8 

5 





















[0041] The shuttle cloning vector may be constructed from a basic "backbone" vector or fragment to which are ligated 
one or more linkers which include cloning or restriction enzyme recognition sites. Included in the cloning sites are the 
compatible, or complementary cloning sites hereinabove described. Genes and/or promoters having ends corresponding 
to the restriction sites of the shuttle vector may be ligated into the shuttle vector through techniques known in the art. 
[0042] The shuttle cloning vector can be employed to amplify DNA sequences in prokaryotic systems. The shuttle 
cloning vector may be prepared from plasmids generally used in prokaryotic systems and in particular in bacteria. Thus, 
for example, the shuttle cloning vector may be derived from plasmids such as pBR322; pUC 18; etc. 
[0043] The retroviral plasmid vector includes one or more promoters. Suitable promoters which may be employed 
include, but are not limited to, the retroviral LTR; the SV40 promoter; and the human cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter 
described in Miller, et al., Biotechniques, Vol. 7, No. 9, 980-990 (1989) , or any other promoter (e.g., cellular promoters 
such as eukaryotic cellular promoters including, but not limited to, the histone, pol III, and β-actin promoters). Other viral 
promoters which may be employed include, but are not limited to, adenovirus promoters, TK promoters, and B19 par-
vovirus promoters. The selection of a suitable promoter will be apparent to those skilled in the art from the teachings 
contained herein. 
[0044] In one embodiment, the retroviral plasmid vector, which includes a polynucleotide encoding the modified en-
velope and a polynucleotide encoding a therapeutic agent, is employed to transduce a packaging cell line to form a 
producer cell line, which will generate infectious retroviral vector particles. In one embodiment, the packaging cell line 
is a "pre-packaging" cell line which includes polynucleotides encoding the gag and pol retroviral proteins, but not the 
envelope, or env, protein. Examples of such "pre-packaging" cell lines include, but are not limited to, GP8 cells, GPL 
cells, and GPNZ cells as described in Morgan, et al., J. Virol., Vol. 67, No. 8, pgs. 4712-4721 (August 1993). Such cell 
lines, upon transduction with the retroviral plasmid vector, generates infectious retroviral particles including the modified, 
or chimeric, envelope and a polynucleotide encoding the therapeutic agent. 
[0045] In another embodiment, a retroviral plasmid vector which includes a polynucleotide encoding a modified poly-
nucleotide encoding a modified envelope polypeptide in accordance with the invention and a polynucleotide encoding 
a therapeutic agent is used to transduce a packaging cell line including nucleic acid sequences encoding the gag, pol, 
and wild-type (i.e., unmodified) env retroviral proteins. Examples of such packaging cell lines include, but are not limited 
to, the PE501, PA317 (ATCC No. CRL 9078), Ψ-2, Ψ-AM, PA12, T19-14X, VT-19-17-H2, ΨCRE, ΨCRIP, GP+E-86, 
GP+envAm12, and DAN cell lines as described in Miller, Human Gene Therapy, Vol. 1, pgs. 5-14 (1990), which is 
incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. The vector may transduce the packaging cells through any means known 
in the art. Such means include, but are not limited to, electroporation, and use of liposomes, such as hereinabove 
described, and CaPO 4 precipitation. Such producer cells generate infectious retroviral vector particles which include the 
modified envelope, the wild-type retroviral envelope, a polynucleotide encoding the modified, or chimeric, envelope, and 
a polynucleotide encoding a therapeutic agent. 
[0046] In another embodiment, there is provided a packaging cell which includes a nucleic acid sequence encoding 
a modified chimeric envelope in accordance with the invention, and which may further include nucleic acid sequences 
encoding the gag and pol proteins. A producer cell for generating viral particles which includes a modified envelope in 
accordance with the invention is produced by introducing into such packaging cell either a retroviral vector particle or a 
retroviral plasmid vector, in each case including a polynucleotide encoding a therapeutic agent. The producer cell line 
thus generates infectious retroviral particles including the modified chimeric envelope and the polynucleotide encoding 
the therapeutic agent. 
[0047] When the retroviral vector particle includes the first and second retroviral envelopes as hereinabove described, 
such particle may be formed by transducing a packaging cell line as hereinabove described with a retroviral plasmid 
vector including a polynucleotide encoding the second retroviral envelope and a polynucleotide encoding a therapeutic 
agent. The packaging cell line thus becomes a producer cell line that generates retroviral vector particles including the 
first and second retroviral envelopes, and a polynucleotide encoding a therapeutic agent. Alternatively, a pre-packaging 
cell line may be transfected with an expression vehicle including a polynucleotide encoding the first retroviral envelope 
and a retroviral plasmid vector including a polynucleotide encoding the second retroviral envelope and a polynucleotide 
encoding a therapeutic agent. Such cells then generate retroviral vector particles having the first and second retroviral 
envelopes as hereinabove described and a polynucleotide encoding a therapeutic agent. 
[0048] The vector particles, which include the modified retroviral envelope, and a polynucleotide encoding a therapeutic 
agent, may be administered to a host in an amount effective to produce a therapeutic effect in the host. The host may 
be a mammalian host, which may be a human or non-human primate host. The vector particles, upon administration to 
the host, become concentrated at a site of an exposed matrix component, which is collagen (including Type I collagen 
and Type IV collagen), whereby the viral vector particles infect or transduce the cells at such site of the exposed 
extracellular matrix component, and the infected or transduced cells express the therapeutic agent in vivo. The exact 
dosage of vector particles which may be administered is dependent upon a variety of factors, including the age, sex, 
and weight of the patient, the cells which are to be transduced, the therapeutic agent which is to be administered, and 
the severity of the disorder to be treated. 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

9 

5 





















[0049] The vector particles may be administered systemically, such as, for example, by intravenous, intracolonic, 
intratracheal, intraperitoneal, intranasal, intravascular, intrathecal, intraarterial, intracranial, intramarrow, intrapleural, 
intradermal, subcutaneous, intramuscular, intraocular, intraosseous and/or intrasynovial administration. The vector par-
ticles also may be administered topically. 
[0050] Cells which may be infected or transduced with the vector particles of the present invention include, but are 
not limited to, endothelial cells, tumor cells, chondrocytes, fibroblasts and fibroelastic cells of connective tissues; oste-
ocytes and osteoblasts in bone; endothelial and smooth muscle cells of the vasculature; epithelial and subepithelial cells 
of the gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts; vascular cells, connective tissue cells, and hepatocytes of a fibrotic liver, 
and the reparative mononuclear and granulocytic infiltrates of inflamed tissues. 
[0051] Diseases or disorders which may be treated with the vector particles of the present invention include, but are 
not limited to, those associated with an exposed extracellular matrix component. Such diseases or disorders include, 
but are not limited to, cardiovascular diseases; cirrhosis of the liver; and connective tissue disorders (including those 
associated with ligaments, tendons, and cartilage), and vascular disorders associated with the exposition of collagen. 
The vector particles may be used to deliver therapeutic genes to restore endothelial cell function and to combat thrombosis, 
in addition to limiting the proliferative and fibrotic responses associated with neointima formation. The vector particles 
also may be employed in treating vascular lesions; ulcerative lesions; areas of inflammation; sites of laser injury, such 
as the eye, for example; sites of surgery; arthritic joints; scars; and keloids. The vector particles also may be employed 
in wound healing. 
[0052] The vector particles also may be employed in the treatment of tumors, including malignant and non-malignant 
tumors. Although Applicants do not intend to be limited to any theoretical reasoning, tumors, when invading normal 
tissues or organs, secrete enzymes such as collagenases or metalloproteinases which provide for the exposition of 
extracellular matrix components. By targeting vector particles to such exposed extracellular matrix components, the 
vector particles become concentrated at the exposed matrix components which are adjacent the tumor, whereby the 
vector particles then infect the tumor cells. Such tumors include, but are not limited to, carcinomas; sarcomas, including 
chondrosarcoma, osteosarcoma, and fibrosarcoma; and brain tumors. For example, a vector particle, such as a retroviral 
vector particle, including a modified envelope protein, including a targeting polypeptide which binds to an extracellular 
matrix component located at a tumor site, and a polynucleotide encoding a negative selective marker or "suicide" gene, 
such as, for example, the Herpes Simplex Virus thymidine kinase (TK) gene, may be administered to a patient, whereby 
the vector particles transduce the tumor cells. After the tumor cells are transduced with the vector particles, an interaction 
agent, such as gancyclovir or acyclovir, is administered to the patient, whereby the transduced tumor cells are killed. 
[0053] Other polynucleotides encoding anti-tumor agents which may be contained in the vector particles include, but 
are not limited to, polynucleotides encoding cell cycle control agents, polynucleotides (such as, for example, antisense 
polynucleotides) which bind to polynucleotides encoding cyclin G1 or cyclin D1, tumor suppressor proteins, anti-ang-
iogenic factors, such as, for example, endothelial monocyte activating polypeptide-2 (EMAP-2), cytokines and growth 
factors, which include those cytokines and growth factors hereinabove described. The vector particles including such 
polynucleotides are administered to a patient, whereby the vector particles bind to an extracellular matrix component 
located at a tumor site, and then transduce the tumor cells. Growth of the tumor cells is inhibited, suppressed, or destroyed 
upon expression of the anti-tumor agent by the transduced tumor cells. 
[0054] It is to be understood that the present invention is not to be limited to the treatment of any particular disease 
or disorder. 
[0055] The vector particles, which include the modified viral surface protein and a polynucleotide encoding a therapeutic 
agent, may be administered to an animal in vivo as part of an animal model for the study of the effectiveness of a gene 
therapy treatment. The vector particles may be administered in varying doses to different animals of the same species, 
whereby the vector particles will bind to an extracellular matrix component in the animal. The animals then are evaluated 
for the expression of the desired therapeutic agent in vivo in the animal. From the data obtained from such evaluations, 
one may determine the amount of vector particles to be administered to a human patient. 
[0056] The vector particles, which include the modified viral surface protein and a polynucleotide encoding a therapeutic 
agent, may be concentrated from dilute vector stocks in vitro by contacting a dilute vector stock with an extracellular 
matrix component to which the modified viral surface protein will bind. Such binding enables one to obtain a concentrated 
stock of the vector particles. 
[0057] In addition, the modified viral surface proteins of the present invention may be employed to form proteolipo-
somes; i.e., the modified viral surface protein forms a portion of the liposome wall. Such proteoliposomes may be 
employed for gene transfer or for drug delivery to cells located at a site of an exposed extracellular matrix component. 

EXAMPLES 

[0058] The invention now will be described with respect to the following examples; however, the scope of the present 
invention is not intended to be limited thereby. 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

10 

5 





















Example 1 

[0059] Cee+ is a CMV-env expression vector constructed by digesting CEE (Morgan, et al., J. Virol., Vol. 67, No. 8, 
pgs. 4712-4721 (August 1993)) with HindIII and NotI, filling in the NotI site with a Klenow fragment, and ligating the 
CMV-env cassette into pBluescript II SK + (Stratagene, La Jolla, California) digested with SmaI and HindIII. PCR and 
recombinant DNA technologies then were employed to make the construct ECB-CEE+, which includes a polynucleotide 
encoding a chimeric Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus based gp70 envelope protein that incorporates a high-affinity 
collagen binding domain within its primary structure (Figure 1A). The modified collagen binding domain was derived 
from a functional domain within von Willebrand Factor involved in the recognition of exposed vascular collagen sequences. 
(Takagi, et al., Biochemistry, Vol. 32, pgs. 8530-8534 (1992); Tuan, et al., Conn. Tiss. Res., Vol. 34, pgs. 1-9 (1996)). 
ECB-CEE+ incorporates a polypeptide which includes the collagen binding decapeptide WREPSFMALS. This construct 
was designed specifically for targeting a retrovirus to collagen exposed by injury, inflammation, disease, or reparative 
surgical procedures. The cysteine residue within the original von Willebrand Factor sequence was replaced conservatively 
by a methionine, in order that the collagen binding domain would not interfere with the elaborate disulfide bond formation 
required for the folding and/or renaturation of gp70. Flanking linkers also were designed to include glycine residues to 
increase rotational flexibility and to minimize steric hindrances, while a histidine residue was included to promote an 
external conformation of the collagen binding domain. The complete 19 amino acid polypeptide insert, which includes 
the collagen binding decapeptide, is shown in Figure 1A and Figure 1B. 
[0060] The construct ECBT-CEE+ includes the same components as ECB-CEE+ as well as a six amino acid residue 
putative thrombin cleavage site, which has the sequence LVPRGS, between the collagen-binding domain and the 
remainder of the envelope protein. 
[0061] ECB-CEE+ and ECBT-CEE+ were constructed using PCR and recombinant DNA technologies as mentioned 
above. The collagen binding decapeptide WREPSFMALS is encoded by the following polynucleotide: TGG CGC GAA 
CCG AGC TTC ATG GCT CTG AGC. The following PCR primers in making ECB-CEE+ were employed. 
Sense (CBD-S1): 5' -ATC ACC TGG GAG GTA ACC GGC CAT ATG TGG CGC-3' 
Antisense (CBD-aS1): 5'-CG ATC TCC ATT GGT TAC CAA GCT AGC ACC GCT-3' 
CBD-S1 also was employed in making ECBT-CEE+, along with the following antisense primer CBDT-aS2: 
5'-CG ATC TCC ATT GGT TAC CAA GCT GCC GCG CGG CAC CAG ACC GCT CAG AGC-3' 
[0062] Collagen binding domains with proper linkers were amplified by PCR using the primers CBDS1 and CBDaS1 
or CBDS1 and CBDaS2, respectively (94°C 1 min, 55°C 10 min, 72°C 10 min., 35 cycles). The PCR bands then were 
digested with BstEII. Cee+ was digested with BstEII, followed by dephosphorylation of the linearized Cee+ vector. The 
digested PCR bands were ligated to the linearized Cee+ vector to form ECB-CEE+ and ECBT-CEE+. The proper 
orientations of the cDNA constructs were confirmed by sequence analysis. 
[0063] ECB-CEE+ was cut with NheI and EcoRI, and an NheI/ EcoRI fragment including a polynucleotide encoding a 
modified ecotropic retroviral envelope was ligated to NheI and EcoRI digested plasmid pET28 (Tuan, et al. Conn. Tiss. 
Res., Vol. 1, pgs. 1-9 (1996)) to form pET28SU-ECB-CEE+. Plasmid pET28SU-ECB-CEE+ includes a polynucleotide 
encoding a chimeric fusion protein containing a contiguous series of functional domains-a His x 6 purification tag and a 
von Willebrand Factor derived collagen binding domain within the envelope structure followed by the mature surface 
(SU) region of MoMuLV env polypeptide, gp70, comprising amino acid residues 34 to 474, excluding the leader sequence. 
(Figure 2A). As shown in Figure 2A, amino acid residues 1 to 33 are the leader sequence. Amino acid residue 34 of 
Figure 2A corresponds to amino acid residue 1 in Figure 1A and (SEQ ID NO: 1). The ECB and ECB (T) inserts each 
begin at amino acid residue 52. 
[0064] Plasmid pET28SU-ECB-CEE+ was transformed into the BL21 (DE 3) strain of E. coli, and high level expression 
of the recombinant proteins was induced in the presence of 1mM IPTG for 4 hours at 37°C. The induced recombinant 
fusion protein was isolated from bacterial inclusion bodies, solubilized in 8M urea purified under denaturing conditions 
by metal (nickel) chelate chromatography (Qiagen), renatured by slow dilution (1: 5) into Redox buffer (20 mM Tris HCl, 
pH 8.0, 250 mM NaCl, 0.05% NP 40, 2 mM reduced glutathione, and 0.2 M oxidized glutathione), and refolded for 16 
hours at 4°C, followed by dialysis in protracted steps into 20 mM Tris HCl, pH 5.0, 250 mM NaCl, clarified by centrifugation 
at 10,000 xg, and stored at -70°C until used. SDS-PAGE which demonstrates the expression, purification, and renaturation 
of the recombinant protein, is shown in Figure 2B. 
[0065] Binding of the recombinant protein to collagen was determined as follows: 
[0066] Approximately 1 Pg of the protein then was applied to collagen-coated microtiter plates and allowed to bind for 
20 minutes followed by washing. The plates were incubated for 4 hours at room temperature at a primary antibody 
dilution of 1: 1,000. A biotinylated goat antibody to rat IgG then was applied, followed by a strepavidin-horseradish 
peroxidase conjugate. Diaminobenzidine (DAB) was used as a chromogen followed by nickel chloride enhancement for 
microtiter plates. It also was shown that the renatured chimeric fusion protein bound to collagen matrices with high 
affinity, was not washed away by PBS (Lane 1), 1 M NaCl (Lane 2), or 2M urea, and required at least 3M urea to release 
the collagen-bound protein into solution (Figure 2C). 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

11 

5 





















[0067] ECB-CEE+ was transfected into GPL (Morgan, et al., 1993) and 293T (Pear, et al., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., Vol. 
90, pgs. 8392-8396 (Sept. 1993); PCT Application No. WO94/19478, published September 1, 1994), pre-producer cells 
by calcium phosphate precipitation, and the expression of the recombinant protein was monitored by immunocytochemical 
detection, using the 83A25 rat monoclonal antibody (Evans, et al., J. Virol., Vol. 64, No. 12, pgs. 6176-6183 (1990)) 
directed against the Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus envelope protein. Expression of the chimeric envelope protein 
bearing the auxiliary collagen-binding domain was confirmed by immunocytochemical staining in both GPL and 293 
cells (Figures 3A, 3B, and 3C). Figure 3A shows mock transfected GPL cells exhibiting no positive staining for gp70 
envelope protein. Figure 3B shows GPL cells transfected with CEE+ (expressing wild type gp70). Brownish staining of 
the gp70 envelope protein is shown within the transfected cells. Figure 3C shows GPL cells transfected with the chimeric 
ECB-CEE+ env plasmid DNA. Positive staining for the chimeric gp70 protein is shown within the transfected cells. Thus, 
the insertion of a collagen-binding sequence into the gp70 sequence did not inhibit expression of the envelope protein 
in transfected cells. In 293T cells, cell surface expression of the chimeric envelope protein was detected by immunoflu-
orescence using fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis. (Kadan, et al., J. Virol., Vol. 66, pg. 2281 (1992); 
Morgan, et al., J. Virol., Vol. 67, pg. 4712 (1993); Yu, et al., J. Virol., Vol. 69, pg. 6557 (1996)). The expression of the 
chimeric gp70 protein also was confirmed by Western analysis (Figure 3D). The Western Blot shows co-migration of 
the chimeric ECB-CEE+ envelope protein with the wild type CEE+ envelope protein (Mn of approximately 70 kDa bands), 
as well as co-migration of the gag proteins in the 30 kDa region. 
[0068] In order to generate retroviral stocks for further study, a transient three plasmid co-transfection system (Soneoka, 
et al., Nucleic Acids Research, Vol. 23, pgs. 628-633 (1995)) was employed. 10 Pg each of (i) pHIT60; (ii) pHIT110 or 
pHIT112; and (iii) CEE+ or ECB-CEE+ were delivered by transient transfection of 70% confluent 293T cells expressing 
SV40 T-antigen in 10 cm culture dishes using calcium phosphate for 14-18 hours at 37°C, 5% CO 2 . Plasmid pHIT60, 
provided by Dr. Paula Cannon, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, includes the SV40 origin of replication 
and the retroviral gag-pol gene under the control of a cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter. Plasmid pHIT110, also provided 
by Dr. Paula Cannon, includes a B-galactosidase (LacZ) gene under the control of a CMV promoter. Plasmid pHIT112, 
provided by Ling Li, USC Gene Therapy Laboratories, Los Angeles, California, also includes a LacZ gene under the 
control of a CMV promoter. Plasmids pHIT60, pHIT110 , and pHIT112 are described further in Soneoka, et al. The 
cultures then were treated with 6 ml of 10 mM sodium butyrate for 10 to 12 hours to optimize viral production. (Soneoka, 
et al.) The medium then was replaced with D10 and cultures were maintained at 37°C for another 12 hours before 
harvesting the viral supernatants. 
[0069] Viral titers were determined based on expression of the neomycin resistance and/or the β-galactosidase reporter 
genes. 2.5x10 4 NIH 3T3 cells were plated in each of 6-well plates one day prior to transduction. The medium was 
replaced with 1 ml of serial dilutions of viral supernatant with 8 Pg/ml Polybrene for 2 hours, after which 1 ml of fresh 
D10 was added to the cultures, which then were maintained overnight at 37°C, 5% CO 2 , after which G418 (800 Pg/ml) 
was added and G418-resistant colonies were counted 10 days later and expressed as G418-resistant colony-forming 
units (cfu) /ml. For expression of β-galactosidase, the respective cultures were stained with X-gal 48 hours after trans-
duction of NIH 3T3 cells. 
[0070] Simultaneous introduction of the above-mentioned plasmids into 293T cells expressing the SV40 T-antigen, 
followed by sodium butyrate treatment produced retroviral vector titers up to 8x10 6 cfu/ml, as determined by neo R and 
β-galactosidase expression in NIH 3T3 cells. Suspended in cell culture supernatant, the viruses containing the chimeric 

envelope sequence exhibited titers approaching that of wild-type virus under standardized conditions (relative titers: 
0.66 0.42 of wild type, using pHIT110, n=4; 0.53 0.45 using a nuclear-targeted β-galactosidase vector, pcnBg, n=3), 
indicating that the incorporation of the auxiliary collagen-binding domain did not impair substantially the infectivity of the 
modified virus. The ECB-CEE+ viruses were collected and the affinity for collagen matrices was evaluated in comparison 
to wild-type CEE+ viruses, using a modification of standard ELISA techniques. In the ELISA assay, 50 Pl of vector 
supernatant (virus titer of 3.2 x 10 3 cfu/ml for ECB-CEE+ and 5.2 x 10 4 cfu/ml for CEE+) was applied to each collagen-
coated microtiter well and allowed to bind for 20 minutes, followed by washing with 1 x PBS, followed by incubation for 
4 hours at room temperature at a primary antibody dilution of 1: 1,000. A biotinylated goat antibody to rat IgG then was 
applied followed by a streptavidin-horseradish peroxidase conjugate. Diaminobenzidine (DAB) was used as a chromogen 
followed by nickel chloride enhancement for microtiter plates. After simple washing with physiological saline, only the 
viruses bearing the chimeric env protein remained bound to collagen (Lane 1, dark staining wells) upon washing with 
PBS, while the wild type CEE+ virions were removed. (Figure 3E.) 
[0071] The capability of collagen matrices to concentrate the ECB-CEE+ retroviral vectors from dilute solutions was 
examined first by applying retroviral supernatant to collagen coated 6-well culture plates, washing the culture plates with 
physiological saline, and then seeding a monolayer of cells onto the washed plates. Specifically, 1.5 ml of vector super-
natant bearing ECB-CEE+, wild-type CEE+, or buffer (viral titer: 4.4 x 10 3 cfu/ml for ECB-CEE+ and 9.1 x 10 4 for CEE+) 
were incubated at 37°C in 6-well plates in which an island of collagen was applied (within a cloning ring), and washed 
twice with 1X PBS. 1 x 10 5 NIH 3T3 cells, suspended in DMEM-10% FBS medium containing 8 Pg/ml Polybrene then 
were plated into each well. The cultures were incubated at 37°C overnight, replaced with D10 medium not containing 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

12 

5 





















Polybrene, and stained with X-Gal after an additional 24 hours of incubation at 37°C. As shown in Figure 4A, the collagen-
targeted retroviral vector remained bound to the collagen matrix under conditions in which the wild-type CEE+ was 
washed away. From the transduction efficiencies (20-40%) observed in the NIH 3T3 cells overlaid upon the virus-bound 
collagen (Figure 4B), the concentration effect observed under these conditions was at least two orders of magnitude 
greater than the assayed titer of the original supernatants. 
[0072] Based on previous observations that the biological half-life of collagen-targeted TGF-β1 fusion protein (Tuan, 
et al., Conn. Tiss. Res., Vol. 34, pgs. 1-9 (1996)) may be extended by the physical association with collagen, it was 
anticipated that the collagen-targeted retroviral vectors also may gain resistance to inactivation by serum components. 
The comparative infectivity of ECB-CEE+ virions in the presence of normal human serum under standardized conditions 
was examined. NIH 3T3 cells were assayed for β-galactosidase expression 48 hours following transduction with the 
ECB-CEE+ vector or ECB-CEE+ in suspension. Prior to the transduction of NIH 3T3 cells, collagen-bound ECB-CEE+ 
virions and ECB-CEE+ virions in suspension were exposed to 10% normal human serum for various time periods, 
followed by complement inactivation at 50°C for 30 minutes. 
[0073] More particularly, 50 Pl of ECB-CEE+ supernatant were applied three times to each collagen-coated well and 
the viruses were incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes. Then, the collagen-bound vector was exposed to 10% normal human 
serum for various time periods, after which 1 x 10 3 cells in D10, containing 8 Pg/ml Polybrene, were plated for 2 hours. 
After replacement with fresh D10 medium, the cultures were incubated at 37°C in 5% for 48 hours after which the cultures 
were stained with X-gal stain. For comparison, 50 Pl of ECB-CEE+ supernatant (ECB-CEE+ in suspension) initially were 
exposed to 10% normal human serum for various time periods after which the samples were heated to 50°C to inactivate 
complement, and then applied to 1 x 10 3 cells in non-coated wells, in the presence of 8 Pg/ml Polybrene overnight. 
Medium then was replaced with fresh D10 medium, and cultures were maintained for 48 hours prior to X-gal staining. 
Transduction efficiency was determined by counting the number of cells with blue-staining nuclei in a total of 300 cells. 
Results are expressed as percent of transduction efficiency prior to incubation with normal human serum which parallels 
that with heat-inactivated serum (n = 3 for each group). The significance of difference between the two groups was 
tested by the Student's t-test. Transduction efficiency of ECB-CEE+ virions on collagen was greater than ECB-CEE+ 
virions in suspension at 1 or 2 minutes of incubation with serum. 
[0074] In contrast to the wild-type virus which is inactivated rapidly by serum components (Bartholomew, et al., J. Exp. 
Med., Vol. 147, pgs. 844-853 (1978); Rother, et al., J. Exp. Med., Vol. 182, pgs. 1345-1355 (1995); Pensiero, et al., 
Human Gene Therapy, Vol. 7, pgs. 1095-1101 (1996)), the ECB-CEE+ virions were more resistant, exhibiting appreciable 
transduction efficiencies in the presence of normal human serum. (Figure 4C) Whereas the wild-type virus and ECB-
CEE+ virions in suspension were inactivated within one minute of exposure to 10% normal human serum, the infectivity 
of the collagen-bound virions was diminished but not abolished. The resistance of the ECB-CEE+ virions to serum 
inactivation was found to be dependent upon their binding to collagen, rather than the modification of the envelope 
protein itself, was responsible for this selective protection. 

Example 2 

[0075] A major advantage of gene therapy over conventional pharmacological therapy for cardiovascular disease is 
the potential that transduction of vascular cells at specific sites will result in localized cellular effects and/or sustained 
levels of protein production in target vascular cells. (Feldman, et al., Cardiovascular Res., Vol. 32, pgs. 194-207 (1996); 
Gibbons, et al., N. Engl. J. Med., Vol. 330, pgs. 1431-1438 (1994).) Restenosis following vascular injury represents a 
leading target for cardiovascular gene therapy on the basis of its high incidence (Glagov, Circulation, Vol. 89, pgs. 
2888-2891 (1994); Schwartz, et al., Am. Coll. Cardiol., Vol. 17, pg. 1284 (1992); Myers, Wound Healing Responses in 
Cardiovascular Disease, Weber, ed., Futura Publishing Co., Mt. Kisco, N.Y., pgs. 137-150 (1995)) and refractoriness 
to conventional approaches (Hermans, et al., Am. Heart J., Vol. 122, pgs. 171-187 (1991); Popma, et al., Circulation, 
Vol. 84, pgs. 1426-1436 (1991); Feldman, et al., Fundam. Clin. Pharmacol., Vol. 9, pgs. 8-16 (1995)). In order to investigate 
the binding properties of the chimeric envelope protein to injured vis-a-vis non-injured vasculature, the purified, renatured 
SU-ECB-CEE+ chimeric envelope protein was applied to a segment of normal mouse aorta or inferior vena cava (IVC) 
and to aortic or venous segments wherein the endothelial layer had been denuded by the passage of a catheter. More 
specifically, segments of aorta and inferior vena cava were isolated, and the lumens were washed with physiologic saline 
to remove blood elements. The endothelium was denuded by several passages with a 2F Intimax embolectomy catheter, 
inflated to a volume of 10 Pl, through the lumen of the vessel segments. 50 Pl of the purified chimeric envelope protein 
or buffer (control) then was instilled into the lumen for 30 minutes at room temperature. The lumens of the vessel 
segments then were washed twice with physiological saline, and the isolated segments then were placed in microfuge 
tubes containing 200 Pl of chimeric envelope protein or buffer for another 30 minutes at room temperature. SU-ECB-
CEE+ treated and untreated segments were frozen quickly in liquid nitrogen, and cryostat sections were fixed in acetone 
for immunohistochemical staining to detect the collagen-bound chimeric envelope protein. Figure 5A shows a catheter-
injured aortic segment that was not treated. Figure 5B shows a higher magnification of the segment shown in Figure 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

13 

5 





















5A. Figure 5C shows binding of the chimeric SU-ECB-CEE+ envelope protein (red-staining material) to an injured aortic 
segment. Figure 5D shows the absence of chimeric envelope protein binding in a non-injured treated aortic segment. 
Figure 5E shows binding of the chimeric envelope protein (red-staining material) to an injured inferior vena cava segment. 
In these experiments, about 1 Pg of renatured SU-ECB-CEE+ protein was instilled into the injured and non-injured aortic 
segments followed by flushing with physiological saline. The injured and non-injured segments then were frozen in liquid 
nitrogen, and acetone-fixed cryostat sections then were subjected to immunocytochemical analysis, using the 82A25 
monoclonal antibody to gp70 and an immunoperoxidase detection system. 
[0076] Collagen-coated microtiter plates and cryostat sections of treated or untreated, injured or non-injured aortic or 
inferior vena cava segments were incubated for 4 hours at room temperature at a primary antibody dilution of 1: 1,000. 
A biotinylated goat antibody to rat IgG then was applied, followed by a strepavidin-horseradish peroxidase conjugate. 
Diaminobenzidine (DAB) was used as a chromogen, followed by nickel chloride enhancement for microtiter plates. 
Histological slides were counterstained with hematoxylin. 
[0077] As shown in Figures 5A through 5D, the collagen-targeted SU-ECB-CEE+ envelope protein bound selectively 
to the subendothelial layer exposed by catheter injury and did not bind to the non-injured aortic segment. Likewise, the 
chimeric envelope protein bound selectively to the subendothelium of the injured vena cava (Figure 5E). 
[0078] The infectivity of ECB-CEE+ virions was demonstrated for the first time in vivo in the proliferative tissues of a 
newborn mouse. Figure 5F shows the in vivo transduction by ECB-CEE+ virions by the expression of the nuclear-targeted 
B-galactosidase transgene in chondrocytes (blue staining nuclei) after injection of vector supernatant (titer = 1 x 10 3 ) 
into the tail of a newborn mouse. 
[0079] In order to investigate further the performance of the collagen-targeted retroviral vector in vivo, the transduction 
of vascular cells following balloon catheter injury in a rat model of vascular restenosis was examined. Under general 
anesthesia (ketamine, 10 mg/kg; rompun, 5 mg/kg) in accordance with a protocol approved by the USC Institution Animal 
Care and Use Committee, a 2F Intimax arterial embolectomy catheter (Applied Medical Resources Corp., Laguna Hills, 
California) was used to denude the carotid artery endothelium of Wistar rats (each weighing 400 to 500 grams). The 
catheter was inserted into an external carotid artery which was ligated distally, and passed into the common carotid 
artery. The balloon was inflated to a volume of 10 Pl and passed three times along the length of the common carotid 
artery. After the balloon injury, the embolectomy catheter was removed and the internal carotid artery was ligated 
transiently just distal to the bifurcation. The distal half of the injured segment likewise was ligated transiently. Each rat 
received an infusion of ECB-CEE+ vector supernatant (titers: 2 x 10 4 to 8 x 10 5 cfu/ml) at 4 to 7 days after balloon injury 
after which the rats were allowed to recover, and fed a regular mouse/rat diet and water ad libitum. The rats were 
sacrificed at the specified time by an overdose of sodium pentobarbital (120 mg/kg intramuscularly), and frozen sections 
of injured carotid artery were stained with X-gal and Siris red stain. Histological sections were examined by light micro-
scopy, for expression of nuclear-targeted β-galactosidase. As shown in Figure 6A, transduction of the arterial wall was 
limited to the site of vascular injury (bracketed area). Histochemical analysis of formalin-fixed arterial segments (Figure 
6B) revealed extensive penetration of the vector into the tunica media of the injured artery, evidenced by the transduction 
of numerous smooth muscle cells. (Figures 6B and 6C.) These observations, in principle, demonstrate the utility of 
genetically engineered retroviral envelope proteins to localize viral delivery to a specific locus of vascular injury. 

DISCUSSION 

[0080] Previous studies demonstrated the feasibility of utilizing retroviral vectors for direct gene transfer into arterial 
wall (Nabel, et al., Science, Vol. 249, pgs. 1285-1288 (1990); Flugelman, et al., Circulation, Vol. 85, pgs. 1110-1117 
(1992); Wilson et al., Science, Vol. 244, pgs. 1344-1346 (1989); Dichek, et al., Blood, Vol. 77, pgs. 533-541 (1991)). 
The transduction efficiency, however, was found to be low (&lt;0.1%), due partly to the low rate of cell proliferation (required 
for retroviral integration) found in the normal intact arterial wall and to the inability to obtain adequate amounts of high 
titer (&gt;1 x 10 6 particles/ml) retroviral stocks required for efficient gene transfer (Nabel, Circulation, Vol. 91, pgs. 541-549 
(1995)). The above examples describe the construction and performance of a collagen-targeted retroviral vector that 
remains stable and infectious upon collagen binding. The physical association of the chimeric virion envelope protein 
with collagen has ramifications in vitro and in vivo: In vitro, in terms of affinity purification and concentration of virus 
stocks from dilute solutions, and in vivo, in terms of boosting the concentration-dependent delivery of therapeutic genes. 
The data support the concept that the components of the extracellular matrix itself may be advantageous target com-
ponents in future gene delivery strategies. Nonspecific binding of retroviral particles to fibronectin fragments has been 
shown to increase the transduction efficiency of mammalian cells (Henenberg, et al. Nature Medicine, Vol. 2 pgs. 876-882 
(1996)). High affinity targeting of growth factors (Tuan et al. Conn. Tiss. Res., Vol. 34, pgs. 1-9 (1996)) and retroviral 
vectors to fibronectin may be used to facilitate gene delivery in the clinical management of wound healing. The above 
examples also show that the close association with collagen rendered the virion less sensitive to inactivation by human 
serum, which occurs presumably via complement-mediated mechanisms (Bartholomew et al., J. Exp. Med. Vol. 147, 
pgs. 844-853 (1978); Rother et al., J. Exp. Med; Vol. 182 pgs. 1345-1355 (1995); Pensiero, et al., Human Gene Therapy, 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

14 

5 





















Vol. 7, pgs. 1095-1101 (1995)). This property of complement resistance may be a considerable utility in the design of 
future injectable vectors. 
[0081] Initially identified as a hemostatic factor in studies of inherited hemophilias (Wagner, Ann. Rev. Cell Biol., Vol. 
6, pg. 217 (1990); Montgomery and Scott, Hematology of Infancy and Childhood; Nathan, et al. eds., Philadelphia, W.B 
Saunders, Vol. 2, Ed. 4, pgs. 1605-1650 (1993)), von Willebrand factor performs a vital surveillance function by targeting 
platelet aggregates to vascular lesions (Ginsburg and Bowie, Blood, Vol. 70, pgs. 2507-2519 (1992)). The transposition 
of a collagen binding domain derived from von Willebrand factor to alter the distribution, concentration, and stability of 
retroviral gene delivery vectors was demonstrated in the above examples. These collagen-targeted vectors may be used 
to increase the efficiency of localized gene transfer, delivering therapeutic genes to restore endothelial cell function and 
to combat thrombosis, in addition to limiting the proliferative and fibrotic responses associated with neointima formation. 
The above mentioned targeted vectors could also have important implications in the design and efficacy of systemic 
gene therapy strategies. The application of high efficiency targeting vectors that, like von Willebrand factor itself, perform 
a surveillance function within the vasculature may represent a major advancement in the potential to treat coronary 
artery disease and stroke. In that collagen is exposed by traumatic, inflammatory, ulcerative, and metastatic lesions, as 
well as sites of surgical intervention, these targeted retroviral vectors provide new approaches to advance gene therapy 
in other areas of surgical intervention. 

Example 3 

[0082] The plasmids (i) pHIT60; (ii) pHIT110 or pHIT112; (iii) ECB-CEE+; and (iv) pCAE (Morgan, et al., J. Virol., Vol. 
67, No. 8, pgs. 4712-4721 (1993)), a plasmid including a polynucleotide encoding the wild-type amphotrophic envelope 
protein, or pCEE, were transfected into 293T cells according to the procedures of Soneoka, et al., 1995, hereinabove 
described. As a result, the retroviral vector ECB-CEE+.CAE, which co-expresses the wild-type amphotropic envelope 
protein with the modified ecotropic envelope protein ECB-CEE+ was generated. Viral titers were determined by neomycin 
resistance and B-galactosidase expression in NIH 3T3 cells as described in Example 1. Titers ranged from 10 5 to 10 7 
cfu/ml. 
[0083] The levels of expression of the envelope protein gp 70 and gag protein p30 in 293T cell lysates bearing the 
vectors with wild-type CEE+, ECB-CEE+, wild-type CAE, and ECB-CEE+. CAE envelope proteins were evaluated by 
Western Blot analysis. The 293T cells were transfected with the envelope expression plasmids, were lysed 48 hrs. later 
in 500 Pl of lysis buffer for 10 minutes, and centrifuged at 10,000g to pellet nuclei. The cell lysates were resolved on a 
precast 8 to 10% gel, and envelope protein precursor Pr85 and the processed surface protein subunit gp 70 were 
detected by using a specific goat antiserum (Zhu, et al., Circulation, Vol. 96, pgs. 628-635 1997)) The Western Blot is 
shown in Figure 7. As shown in Figure 7, Lane 1 is a control (mock-transfected), Lane 2 is wild-type CEE+, Lane 3 is 
ECB-CEE+ alone, Lane 4 is wild-type CAE, and Lane 5 is ECB-CEE+. CAE. As shown in Figure 7, the ECB-CEE+. CAE 
envelope protein was expressed efficiently in 293T cells, as were the wild-type CEE+ and CAE proteins, and ECB-CEE+ 
alone. The co-expressed envelope protein retained its native quarternary structure and property. These data suggest 
that the chimeric ecotropic envelope protein is co-expressed and processed with the wild-type amphotropic envelope 
protein in 293T cells. 
[0084] The level of cell surface envelope protein expression was measured by fluorescence-activated cell sorting 
(FACS) analysis of transfected 293T cells which expressed the wild-type and chimeric envelope proteins. The 293T 
cells transfected with the envelope protein expression vectors were incubated with a monoclonal antibody, 83A25, 
against gp 70 (Evans, et al., 1990). The cells were washed and resuspended in 1: 100 fluorescence-labeled goat anti-
rat antibody. The indirect immunofluorescence flow cytometry patterns for wild-type CEE+, ECB-CEE+, wild-type CAE, 
and ECB-CEE+. CAE envelopes are shown in Figure 8. Results are expressed as relative fluorescence intensity. The 
area of the negative control (mock-transfected 293T cells) is indicated to the left of the vertical line. As shown in Figure 
8, the degree of cell surface expression of the collagen-targeted envelope proteins, ECB-CEE+ and ECB-CEE+. CAE 
were similar to that of the wild-type envelope proteins CEE+ and CAE, indicated by a shift of relative fluorescence 
intensity to the right of the negative vertical line. 
[0085] Figure 9 shows viral binding to CHO 10 cells expressing only ecotropic receptors, and to 293T cells expressing 
only amphotropic receptors. The indirect immunofluorescence flow cytometry patterns for target cells following virus 
binding and incubation with monoclonal antibody 83A25 are shown. Results are expressed as relative fluorescence 
intensity. The area of the negative control (mock-transfected cells) is indicated to the left of the vertical line. As shown 
in Figure 9, the collagen-targeted virions co-expressing a chimeric ecotropic envelope and a wild-type amphotropic 
envelope (ECB-CEE+. CAE), bound to both CHO10 cells and 293T cells (50% of both wild-type CEE+ and CAE; a mild 
shift of relative fluorescence intensity to the right of the negative vertical line), indicating virion tropism for cells bearing 
either the ecotropic or the amphotropic receptor, although to a lesser degree when compared with either wild-type CEE+ 
or CAE. 
[0086] Conferred binding affinity of collagen-targeted ECB-CEE+.CAE virions for collagen matrices was evaluated in 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

15 

5 





















comparison with wild-type CAE virions, using a modification of standard ELISA techniques and a rat monoclonal antibody, 
83A25, against the C-terminus of the gp 70 envelope protein (Hall, et al., Human Gene Therapy, Vol. 8, pgs. 2173-2182 
(1997)). 1x10 6 cfu/ml each of the ECB-CEE+.CAE or wild-type CAE vector was incubated in collagen Type I-coated 
plates for 30 minutes, followed by copious washes with PBS. The collagen-targeted virions, ECB-CEE+.CAE, as shown 
in Figure 10, remained bound to collagen (dark-staining material) upon washing with PBS, while the wild-type CAE 
bearing virions were removed. When plated in non-coated plastic wells, the collagen-targeted virions were washed away. 
[0087] In duplicate experiments, 50 Pl of either ECB-CEE+.CAE vector or CAE vector (each having a titer of 1x10 5 
cfu/ml) were instilled into the left common carotid artery of mice immediately following balloon catheter injury. After 48 
hours, the animals were killed, and the treated arteries were isolated. Frozen tissue sections were stained with X-gal 
stain for the presence of nuclear-targeted β-galactosidase, and counterstained with Siris red stain. No endogenous β-
galactosidase activity was noted during the four-hour staining procedure in the non-treated arteries. Figure 11 shows 
apparent transduction of intimal cells (having dark-staining nuclei) in the injured arterial segments which were treated 
with the collagen-targeted ECB-CEE+.CAE vector. In contrast, no evidence of transduction was noted with the wild-type 
CAE vector at the viral titer used. 
[0088] Either the ECB-CEE+.CAE vector or the wild-type CAE vector, each at a titer of 2x10 6 cfu/ml, was added to 
injured human saphenous vein segments in organ culture. Figure 12 shows minimal transduction (4%) of proliferating 
smooth-muscle cells in the injured venous segment transduced with the wild-type CAE amphotropic vector. In contrast, 
enhanced transduction (38%) of proliferating smooth-muscle cells was noted in the segment transduced with the collagen-
targeted ECB-CEE+.CAE vector. Transduction efficiency has been expressed as % cells with dark-staining nuclei upon 
staining with X-gal stain. 

Example 4 

[0089] Collagen types I and III, as well as types V and VI, are expressed in regions surrounding atherosclerotic plaques 
(Van Zantan, et al., J. Clin. Invest., Vol. 93, pgs. 615-632 (1994)) The expression of collagens type I and type III is 
responsible for the characteristic thrombogenicity, i.e., the reactivity to von willebrand Factor-associated platelets. Thus, 
human atherosclerotic plaques from endarterectomies were obtained as Surgical discards. The plaques were washed 
with physiological saline to remove blood elements. The plaques then were placed in 100 mm plastic Petri dishes 
containing 5 ml of the chimeric envelope protein SU-ECB-CEE+ or buffer for 30 minutes at room temperature. Treated 
and untreated specimens were frozen quickly in liquid nitrogen, and cryostat sections were fixed in acetone for immu-
nohistochemical staining to detect the collagen-bound chimeric envelope protein (Evans, et al., 1990). 
[0090] As shown in Figure 13, the collagen targeted envelope protein bound specifically to the shoulders of plaques. 
Thus, targeted delivery of therapeutic genes to cells at these sites by the collagen-targeted virions could have considerable 
therapeutic utility in the treatment of atherosclerosis. 

SEQUENCE LISTING 

[0091] 

(1) GENERAL INFORMATION: 

(i) APPLICANT: Hall, Frederick L. 
Gordon, Erlinda M. 
Anderson, W. French 
Starnes, Vaughn A. 

(ii) TITLE OF INVENTION: Modified Retroviral Envelope Polypeptides for Binding to Extracellular Matrix Com-
ponents 

(iii) NUMBER OF SEQUENCES: 3 

(iv) CORRESPONDENCE ADDRESS: 

(A) ADDRESSEE: Carella, Byrne, Bain, Gilfillan, Cecchi, Stewart &amp; Olstein 
(B) STREET: 6 Becker Farm Road 
(C) CITY: Roseland 
(D) STATE: New Jersey 
(E) COUNTRY: USA 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

16 

5 





















(F) ZIP: 07068 

(v) COMPUTER READABLE FORM: 

(A) MEDIUM TYPE: 3.5 inch diskette 
(B) COMPUTER: IBM PS/ 2 
(C) OPERATING SYSTEM: MS-DOS 
(D) SOFTWARE: Word Perfect 5.1 

(vi) CURRENT APPLICATION DATA: 

(A) APPLICATION NUMBER: 
(B) FILING DATE: 
(C) CLASSIFICATION: 

(vii) PRIOR APPLICATION DATA: 

(A) APPLICATION NUMBER: 08/837,223 
(B) FILING DATE: 10-Apr-1997 

(viii) ATTORNEY/ AGENT INFORMATION: 

(A) NAME: Olstein, Elliot M. 
(B) REGISTRATION NUMBER: 24,025 
(C) REFERENCE/ DOCKET NUMBER: 271010-419 

(ix) TELECOMMUNCIATION INFORMATION: 

(A) TELEPHONE: 201-994-1700 
(B) TELEFAX: 201-994-1744 

(2) INFORMATION FOR SEQ ID NO: 1: 

(i) SEQUENCE CHARACTERISTICS: 

(A) LENGTH: 229 amino acids 
(B) TYPE: amino acids 
(C) STRANDEDNESS: 
(D) TOPOLOGY: linear 

(ii) MOLECULE TYPE: polypeptide 
(ix) FEATURE: 

(A) NAME/KEY: Receptor binding region of ecotropic gp70 protein 

(xi) SEQUENCE DESCRIPTION: SEQ ID NO: 1: 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

17 

5 






















EP 0 973 538 B1 

18 

5 





















(2) INFORMATION FOR SEQ ID NO: 2: 

(i) SEQUENCE CHARACTERISTICS: 

(A) LENGTH: 687 bases 
(B) TYPE: nucleic acid 
(C) STRANDEDNESS: single 
(D) TOPOLOGY: linear 

(ii) MOLECULE TYPE: polynucleotide 
(ix) FEATURE: 

(A) NAME/KEY: polynucleotide encoding receptor binding region of ecotropic gp70 protein 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

19 

5 





















(xi) SEQUENCE DESCRIPTION: SEQ ID NO: 2: 

(2) INFORMATION FOR SEQ ID NO: 3: 

(i) SEQUENCE CHARACTERISTICS: 

(A) LENGTH: 10 amino acids 
(B) TYPE: amino acid 
(C) STRANDEDNESS: 
(D) TOPOLOGY: linear 

(ii) MOLECULE TYPE: polypeptide 
(ix) FEATURE: 

(A) NAME/KEY: collagen-binding domain of von Willebrand Factor 

(xi) SEQUENCE DESCRIPTION: SEQ ID NO: 3: 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

20 

5 





















Claims 

1. A vector particle having a modified viral surface protein for targeting the vector particle to an extracellular matrix 
component, wherein said viral surface protein is modified to include a targeting polypeptide including a binding 
region which binds to an extracellular matrix component, wherein said vector particle is a retroviral vector particle, 
the modified viral surface protein is a modified retroviral envelope and said extracellular matrix component is collagen. 

2. The retroviral vector particle of claim 1 wherein said retroviral envelope includes a receptor binding region, wherein 
said receptor binding region is modified to include a targeting polypeptide including a binding region which binds to 
an extracellular matrix component. 

3. The retroviral vector of claim 2, wherein prior to modification the receptor binding region of said envelope has the 
sequence SEQ ID NO: 1, and in the modified polypeptide the targeting polypeptide is inserted between amino acid 
residues 18 and 19 of SEQ ID NO: 1. 

4. The retroviral vector of claim 1 wherein said binding region which binds to collagen has the following Structure: 
Trp-Arg-Glu-Pro-Ser-Phe-Met-Ala-Leu-Ser. 

5. The retroviral vector particle of any of claims 1 -4 wherein said retroviral vector particle includes a first retroviral 
envelope and a second retroviral envelope, wherein each of said first retroviral envelope and said second retroviral 
envelope includes (i) a receptor binding region; (ii) a hypervariable polyproline region; and (iii) a body portion; and 
wherein said first retroviral envelope is free of non-retroviral peptides, and said second retroviral envelope is a 
modified retroviral envelope wherein said targeting polypeptide is inserted between two contiguous amino acid 
residues of said second retroviral envelope. 

6. The retroviral vector particle of claim 5 wherein said targeting polypeptide is inserted between two consecutively 
numbered amino acid residues of the receptor binding region of said second retroviral envelope. 

7. The retroviral vector particle of claim 6 wherein prior to modification the receptor binding region of said second 
retroviral envelope has the sequence SEQ ID NO: 1, and said targeting polypeptide is inserted between amino acid 
residues 18 and 19 of SEQ ID NO: 1 . 

8. A modified polynucleotide encoding a modified viral surface protein for targeting a vector to an extracellular matrix 
component, wherein the modified polynucleotide includes a polynucleotide encoding a targeting polypeptide, said 
targeting polypeptide including a binding region which binds to an extracellular matrix component, wherein said 
modified polynucleotide encodes a modified retroviral envelope polypeptide and said extracellular matrix component 
is collagen. 

9. The modified polynucleotide of claim 8 wherein said retroviral envelope polypeptide includes a receptor binding 
region, wherein, in the modified polynucleotide, the polynucleotide encoding the receptor binding region is modified 
to include a polynucleotide encoding a targeting polypeptide including a binding region which binds to the extracellular 
matrix component. 

10. The modified polynucleotide of claim 9 wherein, prior to modification, the polynucleotide encoding the receptor 
binding region encodes a receptor binding region having the sequence SEQ ID NO : 1 and in the modified polynu-
cleotide, said polynucleotide encoding said targeting polypeptide is inserted between the codon encoding amino 
acid residue 18 and the codon encoding amino acid residue 19. 

11. A producer cell for producing a retroviral vector particle having a modified envelope polypeptide, said producer cell 
including the modified polynucleotide of claim 8. 

12. The retroviral vector particle of claim 1, further including at least one polynucleotide encoding a therapeutic agent. 

13. Use of the retroviral vector particle of claim 12 for preparing a composition useful for gene therapy. 

14. A modified retroviral envelope polypeptide wherein, prior to modification, the envelope includes a polypeptide having 
the sequence SEQ ID NO: 1, and wherein, in the modified envelope, a targeting polypeptide including a binding 
region which binds to an extracellular matrix component is inserted between amino acid residue 18 and amino acid 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

21 

5 





















residue 19 of SEQ ID NO: 1, wherein said binding region binds to collagen. 

15. The polypeptide of claim 14 wherein said binding region which binds to collagen has the following structure: 
Trp-Arg-Glu-Pro-Ser-Phe-Met-Ala-Leu-Ser. 

16. A retroviral plasmid vector including the modified polynucleotide of claim 8. 

17. A method of generating retroviral vector particles, comprising: 

(a) transfecting a cell line selected from the group consisting of (i) a pre-packaging cell line including polynu-
cleotides encoding the gag and pol retroviral proteins; and (ii) a packaging cell line including polynucleotides 
encoding the gag, pol, and env retroviral proteins with the retroviral plasmid vector of claim 16 to form a producer 
cell line; and 
(b) culturing said producer cell line to generate retroviral vector particles. 

Patentansprüche 

1. Vektorpartikel mit einem modifizierten viralen Oberflächenprotein zum Richten des Vektorpartikels auf eine extra-
zelluläre Matrixkomponente, wobei das virale Oberflächenprotein so modifiziert ist, dass es ein Targeting-Polypeptid 
mit einer an eine extrazelluläre Matrixkomponente bindenden Bindungsregion aufweist, wobei das Vektorpartikel 
ein retrovirales Vektorpartikel ist, das modifizierte virale Oberflächenprotein eine modifizierte retrovirale Hülle ist 
und die extrazelluläre Matrixkomponente Kollagen ist. 

2. Retrovirales Vektorpartikel nach Anspruch 1, wobei die retrovirale Hülle eine Rezeptorbindungsregion aufweist, 
wobei die Rezeptorbindungsregion so modifiziert ist, dass sie ein Targeting-Polypeptid mit einer an eine extrazelluläre 
Matrixkomponente bindenden Bindungsregion aufweist. 

3. Retroviraler Vektor nach Anspruch 2, wobei vor der Modifikation die Rezeptorbindungsregion der Hülle die Sequenz 
SEQ ID NO: 1 aufweist und im modifizierten Polypeptid das Targeting-Polypeptid zwischen die Aminosäurereste 18 
und 19 von SEQ ID NO: 1 eingefügt ist. 

4. Retroviraler Vektor nach Anspruch 1, wobei die an Kollagen bindende Bindungsregion den folgenden Aufbau auf-
weist: 
Trp-Arg-Glu-Pro-Ser-Phe-Met-Ala-Leu-Ser. 

5. Retrovirales Vektorpartikel nach einem der Ansprüche 1 bis 4, wobei das retrovirale Vektorpartikel eine erste retro-
virale Hülle und eine zweite retrovirale Hülle aufweist, wobei die erste retrovirale Hülle und zweite retrovirale Hülle 
jeweils (i) eine Rezeptorbindungsregion; (ii) eine hypervariable Polyprolinregion; und (iii) einen Körperabschnitt; 
aufweisen und wobei die erste retrovirale Hülle frei von nicht retroviralen Peptiden ist und die zweite retrovirale Hülle 
eine modifizierte retrovirale Hülle ist, wobei das Targeting-Polypeptid zwischen zwei benachbarte Aminosäurereste 
der zweiten retroviralen Hülle eingefügt ist. 

6. Retrovirales Vektorpartikel nach Anspruch 5, wobei das Targeting-Polypeptid zwischen zwei fortlaufend nummerierte 
Aminosäurereste der Rezeptorbindungsregion der zweiten retroviralen Hülle eingefügt ist. 

7. Retrovirales Vektorpartikel nach Anspruch 6, wobei vor der Modifikation die Rezeptorbindungsregion der zweiten 
retroviralen Hülle die Sequenz SEQ ID NO: 1 aufweist und das Targeting-Polypeptid zwischen die Aminosäurereste 
18 und 19 von SEQ ID NO: 1 eingefügt ist. 

8. Modifiziertes Polynukleotid, das ein modifiziertes virales Oberflächenprotein zum Richten eines Vektors auf eine 
extrazelluläre Matrixkomponente kodiert, wobei das modifizierte Polynukleotid ein Polynukleotid aufweist, das ein 
Targeting-Polypeptid kodiert, wobei das Targeting-Polypeptid eine Bindungsregion aufweist, die an eine extrazel-
luläre Matrixkomponente bindet, wobei das modifizierte Polynukleotid ein modifiziertes retrovirales Hüllpolypeptid 
kodiert und die extrazelluläre Matrixkomponente Kollagen ist. 

9. Modifiziertes Polynukleotid nach Anspruch 8, wobei das retrovirale Hüllpolypeptid eine Rezeptorbindungsregion 
aufweist, wobei im modifizierten Polynukleotid das Polynukleotid, das die Rezeptorbindungsregion kodiert, derart 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

22 

5 





















modifiziert ist, dass es ein Polynukleotid aufweist, das ein Targeting-Polypeptid kodiert, welches eine an die extra-
zelluläre Matrixkomponente bindende Bindungsregion enthält. 

10. Modifiziertes Polynukleotid nach Anspruch 9, wobei vor der Modifikation das Polynukleotid, das die Rezeptorbin-
dungsregion kodiert, eine Rezeptorbindungsregion kodiert, die die Sequenz SEQ ID NO: 1 aufweist, und im modi-
fizierten Polynukleotid das Polynukleotid, das das Targeting-Polypeptid kodiert, zwischen das Kodon, das den 
Aminosäurerest 18 kodiert, und das Kodon, das den Aminosäurerest 19 kodiert, eingefügt ist. 

11. Erzeugerzelle zum Erzeugen eines retroviralen Vektorpartikels mit einem modifizierten Hüllpolypeptid, wobei die 
Erzeugerzelle das modifizierte Polynukleotid nach Anspruch 8 aufweist. 

12. Retrovirales Vektorpartikel nach Anspruch 1, weiter mindestens ein Polynukleotid umfassend, das ein therapeuti-
sches Mittel kodiert. 

13. Verwendung des retroviralen Vektorpartikels nach Anspruch 12 zur Herstellung einer Zusammensetzung, die für 
die Gentherapie von Nutzen ist. 

14. Modifiziertes retrovirales Hüllpolypeptid, wobei vor der Modifikation die Hülle ein Polypeptid mit der Sequenz SEQ 
ID NO: 1 aufweist und wobei in der modifizierten Hülle ein Targeting-Polypeptid mit einer Bindungsregion, die an 
eine extrazelluläre Matrixkomponente bindet, zwischen den Aminosäurerest 18 und den Aminosäurerest 19 von 
SEQ ID NO: 1 eingefügt ist, wobei die Bindungsregion an Kollagen bindet. 

15. Polypeptid nach Anspruch 14, wobei die Bindungsregion, die an Kollagen bindet, den folgenden Aufbau hat: 
Trp-Arg-Glu-Pro-Ser-Phe-Met-Ala-Leu-Ser. 

16. Retroviraler Plasmidvektor, umfassend das modifizierte Polynukleotid nach Anspruch 8. 

17. Verfahren zum Erzeugen von retroviralen Vektorpartikeln, umfassend: 

(a) die Transfektion einer Zelllinie, die aus der Gruppe bestehend aus (i) einer Vorverpackungszelllinie mit 
Polynukleotiden, die die gag und pol retroviralen Proteine kodieren; und (ii) einer Verpackungszelllinie mit 
Polynukleotiden, die die gag, pol und env retroviralen Proteine kodieren, ausgewählt ist, mit dem retroviralen 
Plasmidvektor nach Anspruch 16, um eine Erzeugerzelllinie zu bilden; und 
(b) das Kultivieren der Erzeugerzelllinie zum Erzeugen von retroviralen Vektorpartikeln. 

Revendications 

1. Particule vectrice ayant une protéine virale de surface modifiée pour diriger la particule vectrice sur un composant 
de la matrice extracellulaire, caractérisée en ce que la dite protéine virale de surface est modifiée afin d'inclure 
un polypeptide de ciblage comprenant une région de liaison qui se lie à un composant de la matrice extracellulaire, 
et en ce que la dite particule vectrice est une particule rétrovirale vectrice, en ce que la protéine virale de surface 
modifiée est une enveloppe rétrovirale modifiée et en ce que le dit composant de la matrice extracellulaire est le 
collagène. 

2. Particule rétrovirale vectrice selon la revendication 1, caractérisée en ce que la dite enveloppe rétrovirale comprend 
une région de liaison à un récepteur, et en ce que la dite région de liaison à un récepteur est modifiée afin d'inclure 
un polypeptide de ciblage comprenant une région de liaison qui se lie à un composant de la matrice extracellulaire. 

3. Vecteur rétroviral selon la revendication 2, caractérisé en ce qu'avant modification, la région de liaison à un 
récepteur de la dite enveloppe a la séquence SEQ ID N°1, et en ce que dans le polypeptide modifié, le polypeptide 
de ciblage est inséré entre les résidus d'acides aminés 18 et 19 de la SEQ ID N°1. 

4. Vecteur rétroviral selon la revendication 1, caractérisé en ce que la dite région de liaison qui se lie au collagène 
a la structure suivante : 
Trp-Arg-Glu-Pro-Ser-Phe-Met-Ala-Leu-Ser. 

5. Particule rétrovirale vectrice selon l'une quelconque des revendications 1 à 4, caractérisée en ce que la dite 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

23 

5 





















particule rétrovirale vectrice comprend une première enveloppe rétrovirale et une deuxième enveloppe rétrovirale, 
et en ce que chacune des premières et deuxièmes enveloppes rétrovirales comprend (i) une région de liaison à 
un récepteur, (ii) une région hypervariable de polyproline, et (iii) une partie de corps, et en ce que la dite première 
enveloppe rétrovirale est dépourvue de peptides non rétroviraux, et la dite deuxième enveloppe rétrovirale est une 
enveloppe rétrovirale modifiée et en ce que le dit polypeptide de ciblage est inséré entre deux résidus d'acides 
aminés contigus de la dite deuxième enveloppe rétrovirale. 

6. Particule rétrovirale vectrice selon la revendication 5, caractérisée en ce que le dit polypeptide de ciblage est 
inséré entre deux résidus d'acides aminés numérotés consécutivement de la région de liaison d'un récepteur de la 
dite deuxième enveloppe rétrovirale. 

7. Particule rétrovirale vectrice selon la revendication 6, caractérisée en ce qu'avant modification, la région de liaison 
à un récepteur de la dite deuxième enveloppe rétrovirale a la séquence SEQ ID N°1, et en ce que le dit polypeptide 
de ciblage est inséré entre les résidus d'acides aminés 18 et 19 de la SEQ ID N°1. 

8. Polynucléotide modifié encodant une protéine virale de surface modifiée afin de diriger un vecteur sur un composant 
de la matrice extracellulaire, caractérisé en ce que le polynucléotide modifié comprend un polynucléotide encodant 
un polypeptide de ciblage, le dit polypeptide de ciblage comprenant une région de liaison qui se lie à un composant 
de la matrice extracellulaire, et en ce que le dit polynucléotide modifié encode un polypeptide rétroviral d'enveloppe 
modifié et en ce que le dit composant de la matrice extracellulaire est le collagène. 

9. Polynucléotide modifié selon la revendication 8, caractérisé en ce que le dit polypeptide rétroviral d'enveloppe 
comprend une région de liaison à un récepteur, et en ce que, dans le polynucléotide modifié, le polynucléotide 
encodant la région de liaison à un récepteur est modifié afin d'inclure un polynucléotide encodant un polypeptide 
de ciblage comprenant une région de liaison qui se lie au composant de la matrice extracellulaire. 

10. Polynucléotide modifié selon la revendication 9, caractérisé en ce qu'avant modification, le polynucléotide encodant 
la région de liaison à un récepteur encode une région de liaison à un récepteur ayant la séquence SEQ ID N°1 et 
en ce que dans le polynucléotide modifié, le dit polynucléotide encodant le dit polypeptide de ciblage est inséré 
entre le codon encodant le résidu d'acide aminé 18 et le codon encodant le résidu d'acide aminé 19. 

11. Cellule productrice pour la production d'une particule rétrovirale vectrice ayant un polypeptide d'enveloppe modifié, 
la dite cellule productrice comprenant le polynucléotide selon la revendication 8. 

12. Particule rétrovirale vectrice selon la revendication 1, comprenant de plus au moins un polynucléotide encodant un 
agent thérapeutique. 

13. Utilisation de la particule rétrovirale vectrice selon la revendication 12 pour la préparation d'une composition utile 
pour la thérapie génique. 

14. Polypeptide rétroviral d'enveloppe modifié caractérisé en ce qu'avant modification, l'enveloppe inclut un polypep-
tide ayant la séquence SEQ ID N°1, et en ce que dans l'enveloppe modifiée, un polypeptide de ciblage comprenant 
une région de liaison qui se lie à un composant de la matrice extracellulaire est inséré entre les résidus d'acide 
aminé 18 et 19 de la SEQ ID N°1, et en ce que la dite région de liaison se lie au collagène. 

15. Polypeptide selon la revendication 14, caractérisé en ce que la dite région de liaison qui se lie au collagène a la 
structure suivante : 
Trp-Arg-Glu-Pro-Ser-Phe-Met-Ala-Leu-Ser. 

16. Vecteur plasmidique rétroviral comprenant le polynucléotide modifié selon la revendication 8. 

17. Méthode pour générer des particules rétrovirales vectrices, comprenant : 

(a) la transfection d'une lignée cellulaire choisie dans le groupe composé de (i) une lignée cellulaire de pré-
emballage comprenant des polynucléotides encodant les protéines rétrovirales gag et pol, et (ii) une lignée 
cellulaire d'emballage comprenant des polynucléotides encodant les protéines rétrovirales gag, pol et env avec 
le vecteur plasmidique rétroviral selon la revendication 16 pour former une lignée cellulaire productrice, et 
(b) la culture de la dite lignée cellulaire productrice afin de générer les particules rétrovirales vectrices. 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

24 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

25 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

26 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

27 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

28 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

29 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

30 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

31 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

32 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

33 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

34 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

35 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

36 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

37 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

38 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

39 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

40 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

41 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

42 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

43 

REFERENCES CITED IN THE DESCRIPTION 

This list of references cited by the applicant is for the reader's convenience only. It does not form part of the European 
patent document. Even though great care has been taken in compiling the references, errors or omissions cannot be 
excluded and the EPO disclaims all liability in this regard. 

Patent documents cited in the description 

• 
WO 9406920 A [0006] 
• 
WO 9630504 A [0007] 
• 
WO 9631602 A [0008] 

• 
US 5672510 A [0039] 
• 
WO 9419478 A [0067] 

Non-patent literature cited in the description 

• 
MILLER et al. Human Gene Therapy, 1990, vol. 1, 
5-14 [0003] 
• 
LEDLEY et al. Molecular Genetics and Gene Ther-
apy of Cardiovascular Disease. Marcel Dekker, Inc, 
1995, 467-485 [0005] 
• 
NABEL. Circulation, 1995, vol. 91, 541-548 [0005] 
• 
SALMONS et al. Human Gene Therapy, 1993, vol. 
4, 129-141 [0009] 
• 
KASAHARA et al. Science, 1994, vol. 266, 
1373-1376 [0009] 
• 
VALSERIA-WITTMANN et al. J. Virol., 1994, vol. 
68, 4609-4619 [0009] 
• 
RUSSELL. Nucl. Acids Res., 1993, vol. 21, 
1081-1085 [0009] 
• 
COSSET et al. J. Virol., 1995, vol. 69, 6314-6322 
[0009] 
• 
SOMIA et al. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 1995, vol. 92, 
7570-7574 [0009] 
• 
BENDER et al. J. Virol, 1987, vol. 61, 1639-1649 
[0038] 
• 
MILLER et al. Biotechniques, 1989, vol. 7, 980-990 
[0038] 
• 
MILLER et al. Biotechniques, 1989, vol. 7 (9), 
980-990 [0043] 
• 
MORGAN et al. J. Virol., August 1993, vol. 67 (8), 
4712-4721 [0044] [0059] 
• 
MILLER. Human Gene Therapy, 1990, vol. 1, 5-14 
[0045] 
• 
TAKAGI et al. Biochemistry, 1992, vol. 32, 
8530-8534 [0059] 
• 
TUAN et al. Conn. Tiss. Res., 1996, vol. 34, 1-9 
[0059] [0072] [0080] 
• 
TUAN et al. Conn. Tiss. Res., 1996, vol. 1, 1-9 [0063] 
• 
PEAR et al. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., September 1993, 
vol. 90, 8392-8396 [0067] 
• 
EVANS et al. J. Virol., 1990, vol. 64 (12), 6176-6183 
[0067] 
• 
KADAN et al. J. Virol., 1992, vol. 66, 2281 [0067] 
• 
MORGAN et al. J. Virol., 1993, vol. 67, 4712 [0067] 
• 
YU et al. J. Virol., 1996, vol. 69, 6557 [0067] 
• 
SONEOKA et al. Nucleic Acids Research, 1995, vol. 
23, 628-633 [0068] 

• 
BARTHOLOMEW et al. J. Exp. Med., 1978, vol. 147, 
844-853 [0074] [0080] 
• 
ROTHER et al. J. Exp. Med., 1995, vol. 182, 
1345-1355 [0074] 
• 
PENSIERO et al. Human Gene Therapy, 1996, vol. 
7, 1095-1101 [0074] 
• 
FELDMAN et al. Cardiovascular Res., 1996, vol. 32, 
194-207 [0075] 
• 
GIBBONS et al. N. Engl. J. Med., 1994, vol. 330, 
1431-1438 [0075] 
• 
GLAGOV. Circulation, 1994, vol. 89, 2888-2891 
[0075] 
• 
SCHWARTZ. Am. Coll. Cardiol., 1992, vol. 17, 1284 
[0075] 
• 
MYERS. Wound Healing Responses in Cardiovas-
cular Disease. Futura Publishing Co, 1995, 137-150 
[0075] 
• 
HERMANS et al. Am. Heart J., 1991, vol. 122, 
171-187 [0075] 
• 
POPMA et al. Circulation, 1991, vol. 84, 1426-1436 
[0075] 
• 
FELDMAN et al. Fundam. Clin. Pharmacol., 1995, 
vol. 9, 8-16 [0075] 
• 
NABEL et al. Science, 1990, vol. 249, 1285-1288 
[0080] 
• 
FLUGELMAN et al. Circulation, 1992, vol. 85, 
1110-1117 [0080] 
• 
WILSON et al. Science, 1989, vol. 244, 1344-1346 
[0080] 
• 
DICHEK et al. Blood, 1991, vol. 77, 533-541 [0080] 
• 
NABEL. Circulation, 1995, vol. 91, 541-549 [0080] 
• 
HENENBERG et al. Nature Medicine, 1996, vol. 2, 
876-882 [0080] 
• 
ROTHER et al. J. Exp. Med, 1995, vol. 182, 
1345-1355 [0080] 
• 
PENSIERO et al. Human Gene Therapy, 1995, vol. 
7, 1095-1101 [0080] 
• 
WAGNER. Ann. Rev. Cell Biol., 1990, vol. 6, 217 
[0081] 
• 
MONTGOMERY ; SCOTT et al. Hematology of In-
fancy and Childhood. W.B Saunders, 1993, vol. 2, 
1605-1650 [0081] 


EP 0 973 538 B1 

44 

• 
GINSBURG; BOWIE. Blood, 1992, vol. 70, 
2507-2519 [0081] 
• 
MORGAN et al. J. Virol., 1993, vol. 67 (8), 4712-4721 
[0082] 
• 
ZHU et al. Circulation, 1997, vol. 96, 628-635 [0083] 

• 
HALL et al. Human Gene Therapy, 1997, vol. 8, 
2173-2182 [0086] 
• 
VAN ZANTAN et al. J. Clin. Invest., 1994, vol. 93, 
615-632 [0089] 



	

