
	

		

	

	

Note: Within nine months from the publication of the mention of the grant of the European patent, any person may give 
notice to the European Patent Office of opposition to the European patent granted. Notice of opposition shall be filed in 
a written reasoned statement. It shall not be deemed to have been filed until the opposition fee has been paid. (Art. 
99(1) European Patent Convention). 

Printed by Jouve, 75001 PARIS (FR) 

(19) 

EP 1 269 785 B1 

&amp; 

(11) 

EP 1 269 785 B1 

(12) 

EUROPEAN PATENT SPECIFICATION 

(45) Date of publication and mention 

of the grant of the patent: 
05.03.2008 Bulletin 2008/10 

(21) Application number: 01915527.4 

(22) Date of filing: 28.03.2001 

(51) Int Cl.: 

H04Q 7/38 (2006.01) 
H04M 1/66 (2006.01) 
H04M 3/42 (2006.01) 
H04M 1/247 (2006.01) 

(86) International application number: 

PCT/GB2001/001386 

(87) International publication number: 

WO 2001/076299 (11.10.2001 Gazette 2001/41) 

(54) METHOD AND COMMUNICATION NETWORK FOR CONTROLLING THE MENU FUNCTION OF A 
MOBILE TELEPHONE 

VERFAHREN UND ÜBERTRAGUNGSNETZWERK ZUR STEUERUNG VON MENUFUNKTIONEN 
EINES MOBILEN TELEFONS 

PROCEDE ET RESEAU DE COMMUNICATION POUR LA GESTION DE LA FONCTION DE MENU 
D'UN TELEPHONE MOBILE 

(84) Designated Contracting States: 

DE FR GB 

(30) Priority: 31.03.2000 EP 00302759 

(43) Date of publication of application: 

02.01.2003 Bulletin 2003/01 

(73) Proprietor: BRITISH TELECOMMUNICATIONS 

public limited company 
London EC1A 7AJ (GB) 

(72) Inventor: HEATLEY, David John Taylor 

Felixstowe, 
Suffolk IP11 2XT (GB) 

(74) Representative: Lloyd, Barry George William et al 

BT Group Legal 
Intellectual Property Department 
PP C5A 
BT Centre 
81 Newgate Street 
London EC1A 7AJ (GB) 

(56) References cited: 

WO-A-97/32439 
WO-A-98/42115 
WO-A-99/16181 
US-A-5 590 396 


EP 1 269 785 B1 

2 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

Description 

[0001] The present invention relates to communica-
tions methods and apparatus, and particularly, but not 
exclusively, to methods of operating mobile communica-
tions networks and to mobile telephones for use with mo-
bile communications networks, and more particularly to 
remote selection of a menu function of such mobile tel-
ephones. 
[0002] WO 99/16181 (Sun Microsystems) discloses an 
advanced call control function by which a user can create 
a profile for a person who is called often. The profile is 
stored in a database, which may be stored within a mobile 
telephone or in a remote system. In the profile, the user 
can assign one or more telephone numbers to a specific 
person and specify the times and/or dates when each 
phone number is appropriate. For example, the user 
might specify that a given person should be called at his 
office telephone during the day on Monday though Fri-
day, at his home telephone in the early evenings, and at 
his cellular telephone on the weekends. Accordingly, 
when the user dials out using one of these numbers, the 
system will automatically reference the entered tele-
phone number against the profile (database) to deter-
mine whether the number is "valid" (appropriate) in view 
of the current day and/or time. If the phone number is 
determined to be currently valid, then the dial out se-
quence is executed normally. If another number is deter-
mined to be more appropriate based on the profile, the 
system will automatically display on the mobile tele-
phone's screen a message including the name of the 
called person and that more appropriate number and 
prompting the user to either choose that more appropri-
ate number, via an "OK" soft button, or confirm that the 
entered number should be used, via a "NO" soft button. 
If the more appropriate number is selected within a time-
out period, the telephone dials out using that more ap-
propriate number. If the user does nothing in response 
to the prompt, the telephone completes the dial out se-
quence after the timeout period using the original 
number. 
[0003] WO 97/32439 (Nokia) discloses a communica-
tion network terminal capable of supporting a plurality of 
applications and having means of communicating user 
messages such as short messages, comprising means 
for receiving user messages having data and a header 
relating to one of the applications and means for address-
ing the data to a respective application according to the 
header. 
[0004] WO 98/42115 (Finland Telecom) discloses a 
method for creating service profiles dependent on users' 
selections for subscriptions in a telecommunication net-
work. 
[0005] In accordance with a first aspect of the present 
invention there is provided a method of operating a com-
munications network having a user profile store, the 
method comprising the steps of: 

retrieving a dialled destination number from signal-
ling data of a call from a calling user to a called user; 
accessing the user profile store in accordance with 
that retrieved dialled destination number to retrieve 
a corresponding user profile; and 
if the retrieved user profile contains a predetermined 
indication indicative of a corresponding condition as-
sociated with that called user, sending to the calling 
user a command for causing a telephone associated 
with the calling user to enter a predetermined menu 
function associated with that condition; 
characterised either in that said condition is that a 
telephone associated with that called user has sent 
a restricted delivery mode message to the network, 
and in that said predetermined menu function is a 
write messages function; 
or in that said condition is that the called user is cur-
rently associated with a network number that is dif-
ferent from the network number that the called user 
was previously associated with, and in that the com-
mand contains the called user's current network 
number and also causes the telephone associated 
with the calling user to display that current network 
number, and wherein said predetermined menu 
function is a telephone directory function. 

[0006] An advantage of the present invention is that 
the network anticipates the calling user's most likely next 
action and commands the telephone to enter a corre-
sponding menu function, without requiring any input, e.g. 
key presses, by the calling user. This simplifies and min-
imises the actions required of the user. 
[0007] The present invention is particularly beneficial 
in mobile networks, wherein users' mobile telephones 
have a menu system which is navigated by key presses. 
[0008] In embodiments wherein said condition is that 
a telephone associated with the called user has sent a 
restricted delivery mode message to the network, there 
is preferably a step of receiving at the network from the 
calling user message data in text form, and in response 
sending a message to the called user. 
[0009] In embodiments wherein said condition is that 
the called user is currently associated with a network 
number that is different from the network number that the 
called user was previously associated with, there is pref-
erably a step such that when the call from the calling user 
is made by selecting an entry from the telephone direc-
tory, said predetermined menu function is an edit function 
of the telephone directory function. 
[0010] When the call from the calling user is made by 
entering the destination number via a keypad, said pre-
determined menu function is preferably an add entry 
function of the telephone directory function. 
[0011] Preferably, the network also sends to the tele-
phone associated with the calling user data indicative of 
the name of the called user for use by the calling user in 
adding an entry to the telephone directory. 
[0012] Preferably, the network sends the name of the 

1 
2 


EP 1 269 785 B1 

3 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

called user in said command. 
[0013] Alternatively, the network may send the name 
of the called user in a separate command in response to 
an acceptance signal sent from the telephone associated 
with the calling user and indicating that the calling user 
had activated the add entry function. 
[0014] The command may be generated in accord-
ance with menu structure data retrieved from storage in 
accordance with a calling line identity retrieved from said 
signalling data. 
[0015] Preferably, the user profiles may contain an 
identifier for telephone equipment currently registered to 
the user, and said menu structure data may be retrieved 
from a mapping of menu structure data against equip-
ment identifier by accessing that mapping in accordance 
with an identifier retrieved from the calling user's profile. 
[0016] Preferably, the command comprises a number 
sequence corresponding to a menu shortcut for said pre-
determined menu function. 
[0017] In accordance with a second aspect of the 
present invention there is provided a communications 
network having a user profile store, and being arranged: 

to retrieve a dialled destination number from signal-
ling data of a call from a calling user to a called user; 
to access the user profile store in accordance with 
that retrieved dialled destination number to retrieve 
a corresponding user profile; and 
if the retrieved user profile contains a predetermined 
indication indicative of a corresponding condition as-
sociated with that called user, to send to the calling 
user a command for causing a telephone associated 
with the calling user to enter a predetermined menu 
function associated with that condition; 
characterised either in that said network is arranged 
to respond to a said predetermined indication indic-
ative that a telephone associated with that called us-
er has sent a restricted delivery mode message to 
the network by generating said command such as 
to cause the telephone associated with the calling 
user to enter a write messages function; 
or in that said condition is that the called user is cur-
rently associated with a network number that is dif-
ferent from the network number that the called user 
was previously associated with, and in that the com-
mand contains the called user's current network 
number and also causes the telephone associated 
with the calling user to display that current network 
number, and wherein said predetermined menu 
function is a telephone directory function. 

[0018] In embodiments wherein the network is ar-
ranged to respond to a said predetermined indication in-
dicative that a telephone associated with that called user 
has sent a restricted delivery mode message to the net-
work, the network is preferably arranged to receive from 
the calling user message data in text form, and to respond 
by sending a message to the called user. 

[0019] In embodiments wherein the network is ar-
ranged to respond to a said predetermined indication in-
dicative of the dialled destination number being a non-
current destination number associated with the called us-
er, the network is preferably further arranged to send to 
the calling user the name of the called user for use by 
the calling user in adding an entry to the telephone di-
rectory. 
[0020] The network may be further arranged to send 
the name of the called user by including it in said com-
mand. 
[0021] The network may be further arranged to re-
spond to receipt of an acceptance signal sent from the 
telephone associated with the calling user and indicating 
that the calling user had activated an add entry function 
to send the name of the called user in a separate com-
mand. 
[0022] The network may be arranged to generate said 
command in accordance with menu structure data re-
trieved from storage in accordance with a calling line 
identity retrieved from said signalling data. 
[0023] The network may comprise a mapping of menu 
structure data against equipment identifier, and have us-
er profiles containing an identifier for telephone equip-
ment currently registered to the user, and be arranged 
to retrieve menu structure data by accessing that map-
ping in accordance with an identifier retrieved from the 
calling user's profile. 
[0024] The network may be arranged to include in said 
command a number sequence corresponding to a menu 
shortcut for said predetermined menu function. 
[0025] Specific embodiments of a mobile communica-
tions network and of a mobile telephone for use with that 
network will now be described by way of example with 
reference to the drawings in which: 

Figure 1 is a schematic diagram of a mobile tele-
phone in accordance with the present invention; 
Figure 2 is a schematic diagram of a mobile commu-
nications network for use with the mobile telephone 
of Figure 1; and 
Figure 3 is a schematic diagram of a user profile for 
use in the communications network of Figure 2. 

[0026] In this description the following acronyms are 
used :-

BSS -Base Switching Subsystem 
CLI -Calling Line Indication, also known as Calling 
Line Identity, 
GPRS -General Packet Radio Service 
GSM -Global System for Mobile Communications 
(Groupe Speciale Mobile) 
HLR -Home Location Register 
IVR -Interactive Voice Response 
LCD -Liquid Crystal Display 
MSS -Mobile Switching Subsystem 
NSS -Network Switching Subsystem 

3 
4 


EP 1 269 785 B1 

4 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

OSS -Network Switching Subsystem 
SMS -Short Message System 
VLR -Visitor Location Register 

[0027] In Figure 1 there is shown a mobile telephone 
10 of the present invention having components including 
a battery 12, a battery voltage sensing circuit 14, a key-
pad 16, an LCD screen 18, an aerial 20, a receive circuit 
22, a transmit circuit 24 and a control unit 26. 
[0028] The control unit 26 is arranged to receive inputs 
from the keypad 16, the sensing circuit 14, and the re-
ceive circuit 22, and to provide outputs to the screen 18 
and the transmit circuit 24. It is arranged to provide mobile 
telephony functions as is known in the art, such as send-
ing and receiving calls and messages, and managing a 
menu, including a telephone directory, also known as a 
phone book, and is further arranged in accordance with 
the present invention to provide additional functions as 
described below. 
[0029] The control unit 26 is arranged to respond to 
receipt via the receive circuit 22 of various command sig-
nals from a host GSM network (Figure 2) to enter its menu 
system and activate particular submenu functions, there-
by enabling a user to make keyboard entries for those 
submenu functions without any manual selection proce-
dure. As used herein, the terms "command signal" and 
"command" are equivalent. 
[0030] As is known in the art, a typical menu system 
comprises the main menu functions: Phone Book; Mes-
sages; Call Register; Settings; Call Divert; Games; Cal-
culator; Clock and Tones. Each main menu function has 
a plurality of submenu functions. For example, Phone 
Book includes the submenu functions Search; Add Entry; 
Erase; Edit; etc.: Messages includes the submenu func-
tions Inbox; Outbox; Write Messages; etc: and Call Reg-
ister includes the submenu functions Missed Calls; Re-
ceived Calls; Dialled Calls; etc. Some of the submenu 
functions themselves have submenu functions. 
[0031] Before example scenarios are described, it is 
appropriate to describe first the GSM network of Figure 2. 
[0032] In Figure 2, there is shown a GSM network 30 
constituted by four subsystems, namely, Mobile Station 
Subsystem (MSS) 32, Base Station Subsystem (BSS) 
34, Network and Switching Subsystem (NSS) 36 and Op-
eration Subsystem (OSS) 38. Global communications is 
achieved by interconnection of spaced apart national-
based GSM networks operated by different respective 
network operators. 
[0033] The GSM system is well known to the skilled 
person in the art and is described below only in high-level 
detail. However, should any reader require more infor-
mation, he will find a number of publications on GSM, 
particularly, "The GSM System for Mobile Communica-
tions" by M. Mouly and M.-B. Pautet, ISBN 
2-9507190-0-7, published 1992 by the authors thereof. 
[0034] The MSS 32 comprises a plurality of the mobile 
telephones 10, and, until 100% penetration of the mobile 
telephone market by mobile telephones 10, there will be 

a plurality of conventional mobile telephones 40, i.e. 
those not having the additional feature of the present 
invention. 
[0035] The BSS 34 comprises a plurality of base trans-
ceiver stations 42 and a plurality of base station control-
lers 44, only one which is shown. Each of the base station 
controllers 44 is connected to the NSS 36 and to a plu-
rality of the base transceiver stations 42. 
[0036] The NSS 36 comprises an exchange system 
46 and user and terminal equipment databases 48. The 
exchange system 46 comprises a plurality of intercon-
nected mobile services switching centres 50, only one 
which is shown, which are connected to the user and 
terminal equipment databases 48. 
[0037] The OSS 38 comprises an operation and main-
tenance centre 52 which is connected, via a data network 
54, to the BSS 34 and the NSS 36. 
[0038] The user and terminal equipment databases 58 
comprise a home location register (HLR) 56, a visitor 
location register (VLR) 58 and an equipment identity reg-
ister 60. 
[0039] A Voicemail system 62 is connected to the ex-
change system 46 and includes an interactive voice re-
sponse facility (IVR) 64 capable of generating selected 
announcements, and a speech to text converter 66. 
[0040] The HLR 56 is a database which stores user 
profiles 68 (Figure 3), which contain user-specific infor-
mation relevant to the provision of telecommunications 
services and identifying whether a given teleservice or 
bearer service can be provided for a user, and also con-
taining user preferences defining how the user wishes 
the network to handle calls. 
[0041] The VLR 58 temporarily stores subscription da-
ta for users who are normally registered with a different 
home GSM network and who are currently registered with 
the GSM network 30, i.e. under a roaming arrangement. 
[0042] The user profiles 68 include a Delivery Mode 
field 70 containing a flag which, when set, is indicative 
that the GSM network had received from a mobile tele-
phone 10 associated with the corresponding user a mes-
sage addressed to a predetermined destination address 
and containing a unique code for notifying that network 
that the delivery mode for calls to that called user is to 
be "Message Only" mode, also referred to as restricted 
delivery mode. That notification message is sent either 
automatically by the mobile telephone when it enters low 
battery condition, or when the user has selected Mes-
sage Only mode, e.g. from the menu. If the Delivery Mode 
flag is not set, the delivery mode is referred to as unre-
stricted delivery mode. 
[0043] A mobile telephone which can send such a no-
tification message when it enters low battery condition, 
and a variant mobile telephone which, when it enters low 
battery condition, can switch automatically, or be manu-
ally switched, between full and simplex operation, are 
disclosed in our co-pending European patent application 
number 00302738.0, filed on 31 st March 2000. It is not 
part of the present invention and will not be described 

5 
6 


EP 1 269 785 B1 

5 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

further. It is sufficient for the purposes of the present in-
vention to understand that a user profile 68 can be inter-
rogated in the usual manner to ascertain how a call for 
that user should be processed, and that retrieval of the 
state of the Delivery Mode flag (field 70) is just one of the 
retrievable data items. The user profile 68 employed by 
the GSM network 30 has a universal user profile config-
uration. In other words, some profile fields are not rele-
vant to certain types of mobile telephone, and in such a 
case the flags in those fields will be permanently in their 
reset state. In variants, the network is arranged to work 
with two or more types of user profiles, e.g. one type of 
profile will not have a Delivery Mode field 70, whilst an-
other type of profile will have such a Delivery Mode field 
70. Herein, the flag contained in the Delivery Mode field 
70 is also referred to as the Delivery Mode flag. 
[0044] The NSS 36 is arranged to respond to an in-
coming call having the above mentioned predetermined 
destination address by retrieving the message content 
of that incoming call. Upon recognising the retrieved mes-
sage as the above mentioned unique code representa-
tive of the "Message Only" mode, the NSS 36 accesses 
the user profiles 68 in accordance with a source tele-
phone number (calling line identity) retrieved from the 
incoming call, finds the corresponding user profile and 
changes its Delivery Mode flag from its reset state to its 
set state. The NSS 36 is arranged to respond to an in-
coming call having the above mentioned predetermined 
destination address and containing a companion unique 
code representative of unrestricted delivery mode to ac-
cess the user profiles 68 in accordance with the source 
telephone number (calling line identity) retrieved from 
that incoming call, find the corresponding user profile and 
changes its Delivery Mode flag from its set state to its 
reset state. This latter message might be sent automat-
ically by the mobile telephone when its battery is re-
charged, or when the user manually switches the mobile 
telephone from simplex operation to full operation. 
[0045] In a first scenario, a calling user, also referred 
to as a caller, having a mobile telephone 10 originates a 
call and the NSS 36 responds to that originating call by 
accessing the user profile 68 associated with the called 
number, and ascertaining, inter alia, the state of the De-
livery Mode flag. 
[0046] If the Delivery Mode flag in that user profile is 
in its set state, the NSS 36 checks the user's preferences 
(in fields 72, 74 of the profile) and, if this service feature, 
i.e. receipt of a Short Message System (SMS) message 
whilst in "Message Only" Mode, has not been deselected 
by that called user, sends an announcement selection 
signal to the Voicemail system 62 for generating by the 
IVR 64 the selected announcement, "The number you 
have called is in Message Mode. You may speak a short 
message or key a text message.", and also sends to that 
calling mobile telephone 10 a first predetermined com-
mand signal. 
[0047] The Short Message System technology is well 
known in the art and will not be described further. 

[0048] The NSS 36 has also retrieved the caller's CLI 
and accesses the caller's profile to retrieve from an equip-
ment identifier field 76 data indicative of the make and 
model of the telephone currently registered to the caller. 
The NSS 36 refers to a mapping table stored in the HLR 
56, which maps that telephone to its menu structure type, 
and retrieves a type identifier. Using that type identifier, 
the NSS 36 now accesses the corresponding menu struc-
ture table, also stored in the HLR 56, in accordance with 
a Write Messages identifier to retrieve a numeric se-
quence command code, e.g. "23". The NSS 36 now con-
structs a command signal containing that sequence and 
a universal command code for commanding the control 
unit to enter its menu system, and sends it to the caller's 
telephone 10. 
[0049] The control unit 26 in the caller's telephone 10 
is arranged for direct control by such a received com-
mand signal, and responds to receipt of that command 
signal by automatically selecting the Write Messages 
submenu function of the Messages function. This con-
verts the keypad 16 of the caller's mobile telephone 10 
from numeric entry to alpha entry, in preparation for any 
text message that might be entered by the caller. It will 
be appreciated that the caller's telephone 10 has been 
commanded to enter its menu system; to select the Mes-
sages function, which for that particular telephone is in 
second position in the main menu; and to select the Write 
Messages function, which is in third position in the Mes-
sages submenu. This is known in the art as accessing a 
menu function by its shortcut, but the previously known 
use of the shortcut has been only by user input via the 
key pad of the telephone. 
[0050] If the caller had been using a telephone having 
a different menu structure, the NSS 36 would have been 
directed by the mapping tables to the appropriate menu 
structure table, and would have constructed a corre-
sponding command signal containing the universal com-
mand code and a different numeric sequence for entering 
the same Write Messages function. 
[0051] Now that the caller's mobile telephone 10 has 
been automatically switched into Write Messages sub-
menu function, the keypad is immediately available for 
the caller to use to create a text message. When he has 
finished creating the text message, he sends the mes-
sage by selecting Options, and then Send. In a variant, 
the control unit 26 responds to the first key press by of-
fering the Send function under a select soft key, so that 
when the caller has completed the message he sends it 
by means of a single press of the select soft key. In an-
other variant, the control unit 26 the NSS 36 responds to 
the first key press by transmitting a code signal to the 
network indicating that the user has started to compose 
an SMS message, and the NSS 36 responds to this code 
signal by sending a further command signal to control 
the telephone to offer the Send function under the select 
soft key. 
[0052] If the caller decides not to compose an SMS 
message but to speak a message instead, this is received 

7 
8 


EP 1 269 785 B1 

6 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

by the IVR 64 and passed to the speech to text converter 
66 to be converted into the appropriate format to be sent 
to the called number as an SMS message. 
[0053] The NSS 36 receives the text message sent by 
the caller, or the text message output from the speech 
to text converter 66 should the caller not have availed 
himself of the immediate use of the Write Messages sub-
menu function and spoken a message instead, and gen-
erates an SMS message and sends that to the called 
number. 
[0054] In a second scenario, a user might have 
changed his network number for some reason, i.e. to a 
new network number from a previous network number. 
If a caller originates a call to the previous network 
number, the NSS 36 accesses the user profiles in the 
usual manner, and retrieves a profile, referred to as the 
"old" profile, corresponding to that previous network 
number. This profile will contain a pointer to another pro-
file, referred to as the "new" profile, corresponding to that 
new network number. The NSS 36 now checks the "new" 
profile to see that there is no prohibition on the release 
of that new network number, e.g. that a Restricted 
Number flag 78 or a Number Withheld flag 80 is not in 
its set state, and connects the call to the new network 
number. The pointer to the "new" profile constitutes a 
predetermined indication of the present invention, and 
the corresponding condition is that the called user has a 
new network number. 
[0055] The user's "old" profile will be deleted if the net-
work administration re-allocates the old network number 
to another user. This prevents two profiles existing in 
respect of the same network number. 
[0056] In a variant, instead of using "old" and "new" 
profiles, the profiles have a field for current network 
number, and a field for previous network number, and 
the profiles are accessed by matching either of these 
fields with the dialled number, since it will be appreciated 
that callers will dial either the old network number or the 
new network number. Where a profile has been retrieved 
on the basis of a match between the dialled number and 
the number in the previous network number field, the call 
is connected to the called user at the new network 
number, and the presence of that number in the previous 
network number field constitutes a predetermined indi-
cation of the present invention. The network administra-
tion deletes the content of the previous network number 
field if the old network number is re-allocated to another 
user, or after a fixed period of, say, one year. 
[0057] In these circumstances, in addition to automat-
ically routing that call to the new network number, the 
NSS 36 first accesses the mapping tables as described 
above in the first scenario to retrieve a numeric sequence 
corresponding to Number Entry, sends an announce-
ment selection signal to the Voicemail system 62 for gen-
erating by the IVR 64 the selected announcement, "Your 
call is being connected. Please note that the called party 
has a new number which is being sent to you", and also 
generates and sends to that calling mobile telephone 10 

a Phone Book Update command signal. 
[0058] The Phone Book Update command signal con-
tains the universal code for commanding the control unit 
26 to enter its menu system, the numeric sequence "13", 
which selects the Phone Book function followed by the 
Add Entry submenu function, a second code for com-
manding a number entry part as opposed to a name entry 
part, and the new network number. In variants, the control 
unit 26 is arranged to select automatically the number 
entry part of the Add Entry submenu function in response 
to receipt of the Phone Book Update command signal, 
regardless of whether it contains that second code. 
[0059] The control unit 26 does not immediately enter 
the Add Entry submenu function upon receipt of the 
Phone Book Update command signal, but performs a 
preliminary check to ascertain whether the original call 
had been made after selection from its Phone Book. If 
not, then it will provide a display for the entry of a number 
as part of the Add Entry submenu function and display 
in the text box of that display the new network number. 
If the caller wishes to add this number as a new entry to 
his Phone Book he presses a Navigator Key whose text 
is now reading "OK". 
[0060] The control unit 26 responds to that manual 
command by sending a message to the GSM network 
30 indicative of the caller's acceptance of the offer to add 
that new number to his Phone Book. In response, the 
NSS 36 sends a Add Entry command signal containing 
the name of the called party and a code for commanding 
control unit 26 to select the part of the Add Entry submenu 
function which displays a text box for the entry of a name, 
if it is not already doing so, and to display in the text box 
of that display the name of the called party. In a variant, 
the name of the called party is sent in the Phone Book 
Update command signal, and stored by the control unit 
26 in readiness for use in this procedure. 
[0061] If the caller wishes to add the offered name he 
presses a Navigator Key whose text is now reading "OK". 
Otherwise he can cancel the displayed name and enter 
his own text. Alternatively, he can accept the offered 
name and then edit it using the Edit submenu function of 
the Phone Book. 
[0062] If the preliminary check ascertains that the orig-
inal call had been made after selection from its Phone 
Book, the control unit 26 will know, by means of the Di-
alled Numbers submenu function of its Call Register func-
tion, the particular Phone Book entry, and instead of re-
sponding to the Phone Book Update command signal by 
switching to the Add Entry submenu function, now re-
sponds by entering the Edit submenu function of the 
Phone Book, automatically selecting that particular 
Phone Book entry and displaying the received new net-
work number instead of the existing number of that par-
ticular Phone Book entry. The Navigator Key text will now 
read "OK", and the caller can accept the offered number 
by pressing the Navigator Key. 
[0063] In a variation of this second scenario, the control 
unit is programmed to compare the CLI of an incoming 

9 
10 


EP 1 269 785 B1 

7 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

call with the entries of the phone book (this is a known 
act for displaying the stored name of a matching entry) 
and if there is no matching entry it will send a request 
message to the network for a name associated with that 
CLI. This name can be the surname in the account details 
of the calling user, or it can be retrieved from a user-name 
field of the user's profile, if the calling user has previously 
supplied a name. This might be his preferred name, which 
might be a nickname or any other name different from 
the account surname. 
[0064] When the called user ends the call, the control 
unit 26 now automatically selects the Add Entry function 
and enters the received data. This can be the number 
entry part first, followed by the name part, or the other 
way around. The called user can now choose to make a 
new entry in the same way as described above. 
[0065] In a third scenario, when the NSS 36 delivers 
an SMS message for a called user, it also sends a Write 
Messages command signal so as to anticipate that the 
called user will wish to respond by composing a reply 
message via the key pad. The NSS 36 will have retrieved 
the called user's equipment type identifier from his profile, 
referred to the mapping to find the menu structure type, 
and generated the command signal comprising the ap-
propriate shortcut numeric sequence. 
[0066] In a fourth scenario, the network is arranged for 
delivery of e-mail messages to a called user's mobile 
telephone, and when it sends such an e-mail message 
it also sends an appropriate command signal, generated 
in the same manner as for the third scenario, so as to 
anticipate that the called user will wish to respond by 
composing a reply e-mail message via the key pad. This 
command signal selects a Write E-mail function of the 
function menu. 
[0067] Whereas in the above described embodiment 
the network 30 is a GSM network, it will be appreciated 
that this is not a limiting factor of the present invention 
and that the network 30 could equally well be a General 
Packet Radio Service (GPRS) network. 
[0068] Whereas in the above described embodiment 
the control messages from the mobile telephone sent to 
the above mentioned predetermined telephone number 
are received directly by the NSS 36 and handled by the 
profile management program forming part of the control 
programs of the NSS 36, this profile management pro-
gram managing the fields of the user's profile, e.g. chang-
ing the state of flags, entering addresses and numbers, 
and changing or deleting them, in a variant the control 
messages are received at the operation and mainte-
nance centre 52, and the management of the profile in 
the NSS 36 is performed remotely by control programs 
in the operation and maintenance centre 52, or manually 
by network operations personnel at the operation and 
maintenance centre 52 if the user communicates his in-
tentions for profile change otherwise than by the control 
messages sent from his mobile telephone. 
[0069] Whereas in the above mentioned variant, the 
NSS 36 retrieves a stored menu function identifier from 

a field 82 associated with SMS messages, and sends a 
menu function command signal in association with the 
SMS message, in a further variant the menu function 
command signal is incorporated within a modified alert 
command message transmitted to the called user's mo-
bile telephone to trigger its internal ringer. In this case, 
the mobile telephone simultaneously rings and auto-con-
figures in accordance with the menu function command, 
ready for the called user to respond. The modified alert 
command message might include other additional infor-
mation for use by the called user's mobile telephone for 
control of its operation or for display. 
[0070] Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, 
throughout the description and the claims, the words 
"comprise", "comprising" and the like are to be construed 
in an inclusive as opposed to an exclusive or exhaustive 
sense; that is to say, in the sense of "including, but not 
limited to". 

Claims 

1. A method of operating a communications network 
(30) having a user profile store (56), the method com-
prising the steps of: 

retrieving a dialled destination network number 
from signalling data of a call from a calling user 
(10) to a called user; 
accessing the user profile store (56) in accord-
ance with that retrieved dialled destination 
number to retrieve a corresponding user profile 
(68); and 
if the retrieved user profile (68) contains a pre-
determined indication indicative of a corre-
sponding condition associated with that called 
user, sending to the calling user (10) a command 
for causing a telephone associated with the call-
ing user to enter a predetermined menu function 
associated with that condition; 
characterised in that said condition is that a 
telephone associated with that called user has 
sent a restricted delivery mode message to the 
network (30), and in that said predetermined 
menu function is a write messages function. 

2. A method as claimed in claim 1, including the step 
of receiving at the network (30) from that calling user 
(10) message data in text form, and in response 
sending a message to the called user. 

3. A method of operating a communications network 
(30) having a user profile store (56), the method com-
prising the steps of: 

retrieving a dialled destination network number 
from signalling data of a call from a calling user 
(10) to a called user; 

11 
12 


EP 1 269 785 B1 

8 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

accessing the user profile store (56) in accord-
ance with that retrieved dialled destination 
number to retrieve a corresponding user profile 
(68); and 
if the retrieved user profile (68) contains a pre-
determined indication indicative of a corre-
sponding condition associated with that called 
user, sending to the calling user (10) a command 
for causing a telephone associated with the call-
ing user to enter a predetermined menu function 
associated with that condition; 
characterised in that said condition is that the 
called user is currently associated with a net-
work number that is different from the network 
number that the called user was previously as-
sociated with, and in that the command con-
tains the called user's current network number 
and also causes the telephone associated with 
the calling user (10) to display that current net-
work number, and wherein said predetermined 
menu function is a telephone directory function. 

4. A method as claimed in claim 3, wherein the call from 
the calling user (10) was made by selecting an entry 
from the telephone directory, and wherein said pre-
determined menu function is an edit function of the 
telephone directory function. 

5. A method as claimed in claim 3, wherein the call from 
the calling user (10) was made by entering the des-
tination number via a keypad, and wherein said pre-
determined menu function is an add entry function 
of the telephone directory function. 

6. A method as claimed in claim 5, wherein the network 
(30) also sends to the telephone associated with the 
calling user (10) data indicative of the name of the 
called user for use by the calling user in adding an 
entry to the telephone directory. 

7. A method as claimed in claim 6, wherein the network 
(30) sends the name of the called user in said com-
mand. 

8. A method as claimed in claim 6, wherein the network 
(30) sends the name of the called user in a separate 
command in response to an acceptance signal sent 
from the telephone associated with the calling user 
(10) and indicating that the calling user had activated 
the add entry function. 

9. A method as claimed in any one of claims 1 to 8, 
wherein said command is generated in accordance 
with menu structure data retrieved from storage in 
accordance with a calling line identity retrieved from 
said signalling data. 

10. A method as claimed in claim 9, wherein user profiles 

(68) contain an identifier for telephone equipment 
currently registered to the user, and said menu struc-
ture data is retrieved from a mapping of menu struc-
ture data against equipment identifier by accessing 
that mapping in accordance with an identifier re-
trieved from the calling user's profile. 

11. A method as claimed in claim 10, wherein said com-
mand comprises a number sequence corresponding 
to a menu shortcut for said predetermined menu 
function. 

12. A communications network (30) having a user profile 
store (56), and being arranged: 

to retrieve a dialled destination number from sig-
nalling data of a call from a calling user (10) to 
a called user; 
to access the user profile store (56) in accord-
ance with that retrieved dialled destination 
number to retrieve a corresponding user profile 
(68); and 
if the retrieved user profile (68) contains a pre-
determined indication indicative of a corre-
sponding condition associated with that called 
user, to send to the calling user (10) a command 
for causing a telephone associated with the call-
ing user to enter a predetermined menu function 
associated with that condition; 
characterised in that said network (30) is ar-
ranged to respond to a said predetermined in-
dication indicative that a telephone associated 
with that called user has sent a restricted deliv-
ery mode message to the network (30) by gen-
erating said command such as to cause the tel-
ephone associated with the calling user (10) to 
enter a write messages function. 

13. A network (30) as claimed in claim 12, arranged to 
receive from that calling user (10) message data in 
text form, and to respond by sending a message to 
the called user. 

14. A communications network (30) having a user profile 
store (56), and being arranged: 

to retrieve a dialled destination number from sig-
nalling data of a call from a calling user (10) to 
a called user; 
to access the user profile store (56) in accord-
ance with that retrieved dialled destination 
number to retrieve a corresponding user profile 
(68); and 
if the retrieved user profile (68) contains a pre-
determined indication indicative of a corre-
sponding condition associated with that called 
user, to send to the calling user (10) a command 
for causing a telephone associated with the call-

13 
14 


EP 1 269 785 B1 

9 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

ing user to enter a predetermined menu function 
associated with that condition; 
characterised in that said network (30) is ar-
ranged to respond to a said predetermined in-
dication indicative of the dialled destination 
number being a non-current destination number 
associated with that called user to generate said 
command such as to include the called user's 
current destination number and also such as to 
cause the telephone associated with the calling 
user (10) to enter a telephone directory function 
and to display that current destination number. 

15. A network (30) as claimed in claim 14, and further 
arranged to send to the calling user (10) the name 
of the called user for use by the calling user in adding 
an entry to the telephone directory. 

16. A network (30) as claimed in claim 15, and further 
arranged to send the name of the called user by in-
cluding it in said command. 

17. A network (30) as claimed in claim 16, and further 
arranged to respond to receipt of an acceptance sig-
nal sent from the telephone associated with the call-
ing user (10) and indicating that the calling user had 
activated an add entry function to send the name of 
the called user in a separate command. 

18. A network (30) as claimed in any one of claims 12 
to 17, and arranged to generate said command in 
accordance with menu structure data retrieved from 
storage in accordance with a calling line identity re-
trieved from said signalling data. 

19. A network (30) as claimed in claim 18, comprising a 
mapping of menu structure data against equipment 
identifier, and having user profiles (68) containing an 
identifier for telephone equipment currently regis-
tered to the user, and being arranged to retrieve 
menu structure data by accessing that mapping in 
accordance with an identifier retrieved from the call-
ing user's profile. 

20. A network (30) as claimed in claim 19, and arranged 
to include in said command a number sequence cor-
responding to a menu shortcut for said predeter-
mined menu function. 

Patentansprüche 

1. Verfahren zum Betreiben eines Kommunikations-
netzwerks (30) mit einem Benutzerprofilspeicher 
(56), wobei das Verfahren die Schritte aufweist: 

Abrufen einer gewählten Zielnetzwerknummer 
aus Signalisierungsdaten eines Anrufs von ei-

nem anrufenden Benutzer (10) an einen ange-
rufenen Benutzer; 
Zugreifen auf den Benutzerprofilspeicher (56) 
gemäß der abgerufenen gewählten Zielnum-
mer, um ein entsprechendes Benutzerprofil (68) 
abzurufen; und 
wenn das abgerufene Benutzerprofil (68) eine 
vorgegebene Anzeige enthält, die eine entspre-
chende Bedingung anzeigt, die zu dem angeru-
fenen Benutzer gehört, Senden an den anrufen-
den Benutzer (10) eines Befehls, um ein zu dem 
anrufenden Benutzer gehörendes Telefon zu 
veranlassen, eine vorgegebene Menüfunktion 
einzugehen, die zu dieser Bedingung gehört; 
dadurch gekennzeichnet, dass die Bedin-
gung ist, dass ein Telefon, das zu dem angeru-
fenen Benutzer gehört, eine beschränkte Liefer-
modus-Nachricht an das Netzwerk (30) gesen-
det hat, und dass die vorgegebene Menüfunkti-
on eine "schreibe Nachrichten"-Funktion ist. 

2. Verfahren gemäß Anspruch 1, einschließlich des 
Schritts eines Empfangens von Nachrichtendaten in 
Textform von dem anrufenden Benutzer (10) an dem 
Netzwerk (30) und als Antwort des Sendens einer 
Nachricht an den angerufenen Benutzer. 

3. Verfahren zum Betreiben eines Kommunikations-
netzwerks (30) mit einem Benutzerprofilspeicher 
(56), wobei das Verfahren die Schritte aufweist: 

Abrufen einer gewählten Zielnetzwerknummer 
aus Signalisierungsdaten eines Anrufs von ei-
nem anrufenden Benutzer (10) an einen ange-
rufenen Benutzer; 
Zugreifen auf den Benutzerprofilspeicher (56) 
gemäß der abgerufenen gewählten Zielnum-
mer, um ein entsprechendes Benutzerprofil (68) 
abzurufen; und 
wenn das abgerufene Benutzerprofil (68) eine 
vorgegebene Anzeige enthält, die eine entspre-
chende Bedingung anzeigt, die zu dem angeru-
fenen Benutzer gehört, Senden an den anrufen-
den Benutzer (10) eines Befehls, um ein zu dem 
anrufenden Benutzer gehörendes Telefon zu 
veranlassen, eine vorgegebene Menüfunktion 
einzugehen, die zu dieser Bedingung gehört; 
dadurch gekennzeichnet, dass die Bedin-
gung ist, dass der angerufene Benutzer aktuell 
zu einer Netzwerknummer gehört, die anders ist 
als die Netzwerknummer, zu der der angerufene 
Benutzer vorher gehörte, und dass der Befehl 
die aktuelle Netzwerknummer des angerufenen 
Benutzers enthält und auch das Telefon veran-
lasst, das zu dem anrufenden Benutzer (10) ge-
hört, diese aktuelle Netzwerknummer anzuzei-
gen, und wobei die vorgegebene Menüfunktion 
eine Telefonbuchfunktion ist. 

15 
16 


EP 1 269 785 B1 

10 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

4. Verfahren gemäß Anspruch 3, wobei der Anruf von 
dem anrufenden Benutzer (10) getätigt wurde durch 
Auswählen eines Eintrags aus dem Telefonbuch und 
wobei die vorgegebene Menüfunktion eine Bearbei-
tungsfunktion der Telefonbuchfunktion ist. 

5. Verfahren gemäß Anspruch 3, wobei der Anruf von 
dem anrufenden Benutzer (10) getätigt wurde durch 
Eingabe der Zielnummer über eine Tastatur und wo-
bei die vorgegebene Menüfunktion eine Eintrag-hin-
zufügen-Funktion der Telefonbuchfunktion ist. 

6. Verfahren gemäß Anspruch 5, wobei das Netzwerk 
(30) an das Telefon, das zu dem anrufenden Benut-
zer (10) gehört, auch Daten sendet, die den Namen 
des angerufenen Benutzers anzeigen, zur Verwen-
dung durch den anrufenden Benutzer beim Hinzu-
fügen eines Eintrags in das Telefonbuch. 

7. Verfahren gemäß Anspruch 6, wobei das Netzwerk 
(30) den Namen des angerufenen Benutzers in die-
sem Befehl sendet. 

8. Verfahren gemäß Anspruch 6, wobei das Netzwerk 
(30) den Namen des angerufenen Benutzers in ei-
nem getrennten Befehl sendet als Antwort auf ein 
Akzeptanzsignal, das von dem Telefon gesendet 
wird, das zu dem anrufenden Benutzer (10) gehört, 
und anzeigt, dass der anrufende Benutzer die Ein-
trag-hinzufügen-Funktion aktiviert hat. 

9. Verfahren gemäß einem der Ansprüche 1 bis 8, wo-
bei der Befehl erzeugt wird gemäß Menüstrukturda-
ten, die aus dem Speicher abgerufen werden gemäß 
einer Identität der anrufenden Leitung, die aus den 
Signalisierungsdaten abgerufen wird. 

10. Verfahren gemäß Anspruch 9, wobei Benutzerpro-
file (68) einen Identifizierer für eine Telefonausrü-
stung enthalten, die aktuell mit dem Benutzer regi-
striert ist, und wobei die Menüstrukturdaten abgeru-
fen werden aus einer Zuordnung der Menüstruktur-
daten zu dem Ausrüstungsidentifizierer durch Zu-
greifen auf diese Zuordnung gemäß einem Identifi-
zierer, der aus dem Profil des anrufenden Benutzers 
abgerufen wird. 

11. Verfahren gemäß Anspruch 10, wobei der Befehl ei-
ne Nummernsequenz aufweist, die einem Menü-
Shortcut für die vorgegebene Menüfunktion ent-
spricht. 

12. Kommunikationsnetzwerk (30) mit einem Benutzer-
profilspeicher (56), das ausgebildet ist: 

eine gewählte Zielnummer aus Signalisierungs-
daten eines Anrufs von einem anrufenden Be-
nutzer (10) an einen angerufenen Benutzer ab-

zurufen; 
auf den Benutzerprofilspeicher (56) gemäß der 
abgerufenen gewählten Zielnummer zuzugrei-
fen, um ein entsprechendes Benutzerprofil (68) 
abzurufen; und 
wenn das abgerufene Benutzerprofil (68) eine 
vorgegebene Anzeige enthält, die eine entspre-
chende Bedingung anzeigt, die zu dem angeru-
fenen Benutzer gehört, an den anrufenden Be-
nutzer (10) einen Befehl zu senden, um ein zu 
dem anrufenden Benutzer gehörendes Telefon 
zu veranlassen, eine vorgegebene Menüfunkti-
on einzugehen, die zu dieser Bedingung gehört; 
dadurch gekennzeichnet, dass das Netzwerk 
(30) ausgebildet ist, auf die vorgegebene Anzei-
ge, die anzeigt, dass ein zu dem angerufenen 
Benutzer gehörendes Telefon eine beschränkte 
Liefermodus-Nachricht an das Netzwerk (30) 
gesendet hat, zu reagieren durch Erzeugen des 
Befehls derart, um das zu dem anrufenden Be-
nutzer (10) gehörende Telefon eine "schreibe 
Nachrichten"-Funktion einzugehen. 

13. Kommunikationsnetzwerk (30) gemäß Anspruch 12, 
das ausgebildet ist, von dem anrufenden Benutzer 
(10) Nachrichtendaten in Textform zu empfangen 
und durch Senden einer Nachricht an den angeru-
fenen Benutzer zu antworten. 

14. Kommunikationsnetzwerk (30) mit einem Benutzer-
profilspeicher (56), das ausgebildet ist: 

eine gewählte Zielnummer aus Signalisierungs-
daten eines Anrufs von einem anrufenden Be-
nutzer (10) an einen angerufenen Benutzer ab-
zurufen; 
auf den Benutzerprofilspeicher (56) gemäß der 
abgerufenen gewählten Zielnummer zuzugrei-
fen, um ein entsprechendes Benutzerprofil (68) 
abzurufen; und 
wenn das abgerufene Benutzerprofil (68) eine 
vorgegebene Anzeige enthält, die eine entspre-
chende Bedingung anzeigt, die zu dem angeru-
fenen Benutzer gehört, an den anrufenden Be-
nutzer (10) einen Befehl zu senden, um ein zu 
dem anrufenden Benutzer gehörendes Telefon 
zu veranlassen, eine vorgegebene Menüfunkti-
on einzugehen, die zu dieser Bedingung gehört; 
dadurch gekennzeichnet, dass das Netzwerk 
(30) ausgebildet ist, auf die vorgegebene Anzei-
ge, die anzeigt, dass die gewählte Zielnummer 
eine nicht-aktuelle Zielnummer ist, die zu dem 
angerufenen Benutzer gehört, zu reagieren, den 
Befehl derart zu erzeugen, um die aktuelle Ziel-
nummer des angerufenen Benutzers aufzuneh-
men und um das zu dem anrufenden Benutzer 
(10) gehörende Telefon zu veranlassen, eine 
Telefonbuchfunktion einzugehen und die aktu-

17 
18 


EP 1 269 785 B1 

11 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

elle Zielnummer anzuzeigen. 

15. Netzwerk (30) gemäß Anspruch 14 und weiter aus-
gebildet, um an den anrufenden Benutzer (10) den 
Namen des angerufenen Benutzers zu senden zur 
Verwendung durch den anrufenden Benutzer beim 
Hinzufügen eines Eintrags in das Telefonbuch. 

16. Netzwerk (30) gemäß Anspruch 15 und weiter aus-
gebildet, um den Namen des angerufenen Benut-
zers zu senden durch dessen Aufnahme in den Be-
fehl. 

17. Netzwerk (30) gemäß Anspruch 16 und weiter aus-
gebildet, um auf einen Empfang eines Akzeptanzsi-
gnals zu antworten, das von dem zu dem anrufenden 
Benutzer (10) gehörende Telefon gesendet wird und 
anzeigt, dass der anrufende Benutzer eine Eintrag-
hinzufügen-Funktion aktiviert hat, um den Namen 
des angerufenen Benutzers in einem getrennten Be-
fehl zu senden. 

18. Netzwerk (30) gemäß einem der Ansprüche 12 bis 
17 und ausgebildet, um den Befehl gemäß Menü-
strukturdaten zu erzeugen, die aus einem Speicher 
abgerufen werden gemäß einer Identität der anru-
fenden Leitung, die aus den Signalisierungsdaten 
abgerufen wird. 

19. Netzwerk (30) gemäß Anspruch 18, das aufweist ein 
Zuordnen von Menüstrukturdaten zu dem Ausrü-
stungsidentifizierer, und das Benutzerprofile (68) 
hat, die einen Identifizierer für eine Telefonausrü-
stung enthalten, die aktuell mit dem Benutzer regi-
striert ist, und ausgebildet ist, Menüstrukturdaten ab-
zurufen durch Zugreifen auf die Zuordnung gemäß 
einem Identifizierer, der aus dem Profil des anrufen-
den Benutzers abgerufen wird. 

20. Netzwerk (30) gemäß Anspruch 19 und ausgebildet, 
in den Befehl eine Nummernsequenz aufzunehmen, 
die einem Menü-Shortcut für die vorgegebene Me-
nüfunktion entspricht. 

Revendications 

1. Procédé de mise en oeuvre d'un réseau de commu-
nication (30) comportant une mémoire de profils 
d'utilisateurs (56), le procédé comprenant les étapes 
consistant à : 

récupérer un numéro de réseau de destination 
appelé, à partir de données de signalisation d'un 
appel d'un utilisateur appelant (10) à un utilisa-
teur appelé, 
accéder à la mémoire de profils d'utilisateurs 
(56) conformément à ce numéro de destination 

appelé récupéré, pour récupérer un profil d'uti-
lisateur correspondant (68), et 
si le profil d'utilisateur récupéré (68) contient une 
indication prédéterminée indicative d'une con-
dition correspondante associée à cet utilisateur 
appelé, envoyer à l'utilisateur appelant (10) une 
instruction pour amener un téléphone, associé 
à l'utilisateur appelant, à entrer dans une fonc-
tion de menu prédéterminée associée à cette 
condition, 
caractérisé en ce que ladite condition est le 
fait qu'un téléphone associé à cet utilisateur ap-
pelé a envoyé, au réseau (30), un message de 
mode de délivrance limitée, et en ce que ladite 
fonction de menu prédéterminée est une fonc-
tion d'écriture de messages. 

2. Procédé selon la revendication 1, comprenant l'éta-
pe consistant à recevoir au niveau du réseau (30) 
de cet utilisateur appelant (10) des données de mes-
sage sous une forme de texte, et en réponse, à en-
voyer un message à l'utilisateur appelé. 

3. Procédé de mise en oeuvre d'un réseau de commu-
nication (30) comportant une mémoire de profils 
d'utilisateurs (56), le procédé comprenant les étapes 
consistant à : 

récupérer un numéro de réseau de destination 
appelé à partir de données de signalisation d'un 
appel d'un utilisateur appelant (10) à un utilisa-
teur appelé, 
accéder à la mémoire de profils d'utilisateurs 
(56) conformément à ce numéro de destination 
appelé récupéré pour récupérer un profil d'utili-
sateur correspondant (68), et 
si le profil d'utilisateur récupéré (68) contient une 
indication prédéterminée indicative d'une con-
dition correspondante associée à cet utilisateur 
appelé, envoyer à l'utilisateur appelant (10) une 
instruction pour amener un téléphone, associé 
à l'utilisateur appelant, à entrer dans une fonc-
tion de menu prédéterminée associée à cette 
condition, 
caractérisé en ce que ladite condition est le 
fait que l'utilisateur appelé est actuellement as-
socié à un numéro de réseau qui est différent 
du numéro de réseau auquel l'utilisateur appelé 
était précédemment associé, et en ce que l'ins-
truction contient le numéro de réseau actuel de 
l'utilisateur appelé et amène également le télé-
phone, associé à l'utilisateur appelant (10), à 
afficher ce numéro de réseau actuel, et où ladite 
fonction de menu prédéterminée est une fonc-
tion de répertoire téléphonique. 

4. Procédé selon la revendication 3, dans lequel l'appel 
de l'utilisateur appelant (10) a été réalisé en sélec-

19 
20 


EP 1 269 785 B1 

12 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

tionnant une entrée à partir du répertoire téléphoni-
que, et où ladite fonction de menu prédéterminée 
est une fonction d'édition de la fonction de répertoire 
téléphonique. 

5. Procédé selon la revendication 3, dans lequel l'appel 
de l'utilisateur appelant (10) a été réalisé en saisis-
sant le numéro de destination par le biais d'un pavé 
de touches, et où ladite fonction de menu prédéter-
minée est une fonction d'ajout d'entrée de la fonction 
de répertoire téléphonique. 

6. Procédé selon la revendication 5, dans lequel le ré-
seau (30) envoie également au téléphone, associé 
à l'utilisateur appelant (10), des données indicatives 
du nom de l'utilisateur appelé pour une utilisation par 
l'utilisateur appelant pour ajouter une écriture au ré-
pertoire téléphonique. 

7. Procédé selon la revendication 6, dans lequel le ré-
seau (30) envoie le nom de l'utilisateur appelé dans 
ladite instruction. 

8. Procédé selon la revendication 6, dans lequel le ré-
seau (30) envoie le nom de l'utilisateur appelé dans 
une instruction séparée en réponse à un signal d'ac-
ceptation envoyé depuis le téléphone associé à l'uti-
lisateur appelant (10) et indiquant que l'utilisateur 
appelant a activé la fonction d'ajout d'écriture. 

9. Procédé selon l'une quelconque des revendications 
1 à 8, dans lequel ladite instruction est engendrée 
conformément à des données de structure de menu 
récupérées à partir de la mémoire en fonction de 
l'identité de ligne appelante récupérée à partir des-
dites données de signalisation. 

10. Procédé selon la revendication 9, dans lequel les 
profils d'utilisateurs (68) contiennent un identifica-
teur pour l'équipement téléphonique actuellement 
enregistré pour l'utilisateur, et lesdites données de 
structure de menu sont récupérées à partir d'une 
application cartographique de données de structure 
de menu vis-à-vis de l'identificateur d'équipement, 
en accédant à cette application cartographique en 
fonction d'un identificateur récupéré à partir du profil 
de l'utilisateur appelant. 

11. Procédé selon la revendication 10, dans lequel ladite 
instruction comprend une séquence de nombres 
correspondant à un raccourci de menu pour ladite 
fonction de menu prédéterminée. 

12. Réseau de communication (30) comprenant une 
mémoire de profils d'utilisateurs (56), et étant conçu : 

pour récupérer un numéro de destination appe-
lé, à partir de données de signalisation d'un ap-

pel d'un utilisateur appelant (10) à un utilisateur 
appelé, 
pour accéder à la mémoire de profils d'utilisa-
teurs (56) conformément à ce numéro de desti-
nation appelé récupéré, pour récupérer un profil 
d'utilisateur correspondant (68), et 
si le profil d'utilisateur récupéré (68) contient une 
indication prédéterminée indicative d'une con-
dition correspondante associée à cet utilisateur 
appelé, pour envoyer à l'utilisateur appelant (10) 
une instruction pour amener un téléphone as-
socié à l'utilisateur appelant à entrer dans une 
fonction de menu prédéterminée associée à cet-
te condition, 
caractérisé en ce que ledit réseau (30) est con-
çu pour répondre à ladite indication prédétermi-
née indicative du fait qu'un téléphone associé à 
cet utilisateur appelé a envoyé un message de 
mode de délivrance limitée au réseau (30) en 
générant ladite instruction de manière à amener 
le téléphone associé à l'utilisateur appelant (10) 
à entrer dans une fonction d'écriture de messa-
ge. 

13. Réseau (30) selon la revendication 12, conçu pour 
recevoir de cet utilisateur appelant (10) des données 
de message sous une forme de texte et pour répon-
dre en envoyant un message à l'utilisateur appelé. 

14. Réseau de communication (30) comportant une mé-
moire de profils d'utilisateurs (56) et étant conçu : 

pour récupérer un numéro de destination appelé 
à partir de données de signalisation d'un appel 
d'un utilisateur appelant (10) à un utilisateur ap-
pelé, 
pour accéder à la mémoire de profils d'utilisa-
teurs (56) conformément à ce numéro de desti-
nation appelé récupéré, pour récupérer un profil 
d'utilisateur correspondant (68), et 
si le profil d'utilisateur récupéré (68) contient une 
indication prédéterminée indicative d'une con-
dition correspondante associée à cet utilisateur 
appelé, pour envoyer à l'utilisateur appelant (10) 
une instruction pour amener un téléphone as-
socié à l'utilisateur appelant, à entrer dans une 
fonction de menu prédéterminée associée à cet-
te condition, 
caractérisé en ce que ledit réseau (30) est con-
çu pour répondre à ladite indication prédétermi-
née indicative du fait que le numéro de destina-
tion appelé n'est pas un numéro de destination 
actuel associé à cet utilisateur appelé pour en-
gendrer ladite instruction de manière à inclure 
le numéro de destination actuel de l'utilisateur 
appelé et également de manière à amener le 
téléphone associé à l'utilisateur appelant (10) à 
entrer dans une fonction de répertoire télépho-

21 
22 


EP 1 269 785 B1 

13 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

nique et à afficher ce numéro de destination ac-
tuel. 

15. Réseau (30) selon la revendication 14, et en outre 
conçu pour envoyer à l'utilisateur appelant (10) le 
nom de l'utilisateur appelé pour une utilisation par 
l'utilisateur appelant, pour ajouter une écriture au ré-
pertoire téléphonique. 

16. Réseau (30) selon la revendication 15, et en outre 
conçu pour envoyer le nom de l'utilisateur appelé en 
l'incluant dans ladite instruction. 

17. Réseau (30) selon la revendication 16, et en outre 
conçu pour répondre à là réception d'un signal d'ac-
ceptation envoyé depuis le téléphone associé à l'uti-
lisateur appelant (10) et indiquant que l'utilisateur 
appelant a activé une fonction d'ajout d'écriture pour 
envoyer le nom de l'utilisateur appelé dans une ins-
truction séparée. 

18. Réseau (30) selon l'une quelconque des revendica-
tions 12 à 17, et conçu pour engendrer ladite ins-
truction conformément à des données de structure 
de menu récupérées à partir de la mémoire confor-
mément à une identité de ligne appelante récupérée 
à partir desdites données de signalisation. 

19. Réseau (30) selon la revendication 18, comprenant 
une application cartographique des données de 
structure de menu vis-à-vis de l'identificateur d'équi-
pement, et comportant des profils d'utilisateurs (68) 
contenant un identificateur pour l'équipement de té-
léphone actuellement enregistré pour l'utilisateur, et 
étant conçu pour récupérer des données de struc-
ture de menu en accédant à cette application carto-
graphique conformément à un identificateur récupé-
ré à partir du profil de l'utilisateur appelant. 

20. Réseau (30) selon la revendication 19, et conçu pour 
inclure dans ladite instruction une séquence de nom-
bres correspondant à un raccourci de menu pour 
ladite fonction de menu prédéterminée. 

23 
24 


EP 1 269 785 B1 

14 


EP 1 269 785 B1 

15 


EP 1 269 785 B1 

16 


EP 1 269 785 B1 

17 

REFERENCES CITED IN THE DESCRIPTION 

This list of references cited by the applicant is for the reader's convenience only. It does not form part of the European 
patent document. Even though great care has been taken in compiling the references, errors or omissions cannot be 
excluded and the EPO disclaims all liability in this regard. 

Patent documents cited in the description 

• 
WO 9916181 A, Sun Microsystems [0002] 
• 
WO 9732439 A, Nokia [0003] 

• 
WO 9842115 A, Finland Telecom [0004] 
• 
EP 00302738 A [0043] 

Non-patent literature cited in the description 

• 
M. MOULY; M.-B. PAUTET. The GSM System for 
Mobile Communications. 1992 [0033] 



	

