
	

		

	

	

Note: Within nine months from the publication of the mention of the grant of the European patent, any person may give 
notice to the European Patent Office of opposition to the European patent granted. Notice of opposition shall be filed in 
a written reasoned statement. It shall not be deemed to have been filed until the opposition fee has been paid. (Art. 
99(1) European Patent Convention). 

Printed by Jouve, 75001 PARIS (FR) 

(19) 

EP 1 699 141 B1 

&amp; 

(11) 

EP 1 699 141 B1 

(12) 

EUROPEAN PATENT SPECIFICATION 

(45) Date of publication and mention 

of the grant of the patent: 
08.08.2007 Bulletin 2007/32 

(21) Application number: 06008655.0 

(22) Date of filing: 05.03.1999 

(51) Int Cl.: 

H04B 1/707 (2006.01) 
H04B 7/26 (2006.01) 
H04B 7/005 (2006.01) 
H04L 1/00 (2006.01) 
H04Q 7/38 (2006.01) 

(54) Spread spectrum communication method 

Spreizspektrumnachrichtenübertragungsverfahren 

Procédé de communication à spectre étalé 

(84) Designated Contracting States: 

AT BE CH CY DE DK ES FI FR GB GR IE IT LI LU 
MC NL PT SE 

(30) Priority: 26.03.1998 JP 8003198 

(43) Date of publication of application: 

06.09.2006 Bulletin 2006/36 

(60) Divisional application: 

07011901.1 
07011902.9 
07011903.7 
07011904.5 

(62) Document number(s) of the earlier application(s) in 

accordance with Art. 76 EPC: 
05015438.4 / 1 612 960 
04013246.6 / 1 460 774 
01128185.4 / 1 187 358 
99907868.6 / 0 984 581 

(73) Proprietor: MITSUBISHI DENKI KABUSHIKI 

KAISHA 
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 100-8310 (JP) 

(72) Inventors: 

• Yano, Yasuhio 
Tokyo 100-8310 (JP) 
• Murai, Hideshi 
Tokyo 100-8310 (JP) 

(74) Representative: Pfenning, Meinig &amp; Partner GbR 

Patent-und Rechtsanwälte 
Theresienhöhe 13 
80339 München (DE) 

(56) References cited: 

WO-A-96/23369 
WO-A-97/40592 

• GUSTAFSSON M ET AL: "Compressed Mode 
Techniques for Inter-Frequency Measurements 
in a Wide-band DS-CDMA System" WAVES OF 
THE YEAR 2000+ PIMRC. THE IEEE 
INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON PERSONAL, 
INDOOR AND MOBILE RADIO 
COMMUNICATIONS. TECHNICAL PROGRAM, 
XX, XX, vol. 1, 1 September 1997 (1997-09-01), 
pages 231-235, XP002127494 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

2 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

Description 

TECHNICAL FIELD 

[0001] This invention relates to a communication de-
vice applied in a code division multiple access (CDMA) 
communication system and a method thereof. More par-
ticularly this invention relates to a spread spectrum com-
munication device for improving interleave transmission 
and transmission power control in spread spectrum com-
munication, and for realizing handovers between differ-
ent frequencies and a method thereof. 

BACKGROUND ART 

[0002] In a CDMA cellular system, because the same 
carrier frequency is used repeatedly in every cell there 
is no need for handovers between frequencies within the 
same system. However, considering a case such as 
when existing systems are present together, there is a 
need for handovers between different carrier frequen-
cies. Three points pertaining to detailed cases are de-
scribed below. 
[0003] As a first point, in a cell where there is consid-
erable traffic, a separate carrier frequency is used to ac-
commodate the increased number of subscribers, and a 
handover may be performed between those cells. As a 
second point, when an umbrella cell constitution is used, 
different frequencies are allocated to large and small 
cells, and handovers are performed between the cells. 
Then, as a third point, there are cases of handovers be-
tween a third generation system, such as a W (Wideband) 
-CDMA system, and a second generation system, such 
as a current mobile telephone system. 
[0004] When performing handovers in cases such as 
those mentioned above, it is necessary to detect the pow-
er of carriers at the different frequencies. To achieve this 
detection, the receiver needs to only have a structure 
capable of detecting two frequencies. However, this in-
creases the size of the constitution of the receiver, or 
makes the constitution complicated. 
[0005] Furthermore, two types of handover method 
may be considered: a mobile assisted handover (MAHO) 
and a network assisted handover (NAHO). Comparing 
the MAHO and NAHO methods, NAHO reduces the bur-
den of the mobile device, but to be successful, it should 
be necessary to synchronize the mobile device and the 
base station, whereby the constitution of the base station 
and the network becomes complicated and large in order 
to be capable of tracking each individual mobile device. 
[0006] For such reasons, the realization of the MAHO 
method is more desirable, but to determine whether or 
not to handover, it is necessary to measure the strength 
of carriers of different frequencies at the mobile devices. 
However, a CDMA cellular system differs from a time 
division multiplex access (TDMA) system used in a sec-
ond generation, in that it uses ordinarily continuous trans-
mission for both transmission/ reception. In this continu-

ous transmission/ reception technique, unless' receivers 
corresponding to two frequencies are prepared, it is nec-
essary to stop the timing of the transmission or the re-
ception and measure the other frequency. 
[0007] There has been disclosed a technique relating 
to a compressed mode method, for time-compressing 
the transmission data in the usual mode and transmitting 
it in a short time, thereby creating some spare time which 
can be utilized to measure the other frequency carrier. 
As an example of this, there is Japan Patent Application 
National Publication (Laid-Open) (JP-A) No. 8-500475 
"Non-continuous Transmission for Seamless Handovers 
in DS-CDMA Systems". This application discloses a 
method of realizing a compressed mode, wherein the 
spreading factor of the spreading code used is lowered 
to compress the transmission duration. 
[0008] The method of realizing the compressed mode 
according to the above application will be explained be-
low. FIG. 36 shows an example of transmissions in a 
normal mode and a compressed mode in a conventional 
CDMA system. In FIG. 36, the vertical axis represents 
transmission rate/ transmission power, and the horizontal 
axis represents time. In the example of FIG. 36, the com-
pressed mode transmission is inserted between normal 
transmission frames. 
[0009] In the transmission in the compressed mode, a 
non-transmission timing is provided in the downlink 
frame, and can be set to a desired period of time (dura-
tion). This non-transmission timing represents idle period 
during which the strength of the other frequency carrier 
is measured. In this way, slotted transmission can be 
achieved by inserting the idle period during transmission 
of compressed mode frames. 
[0010] In this type of compressed mode transmission, 
transmission power increases in accordance with the 
time ratio between the idle period and the frame (com-
pressed mode frame) transmission timing, and therefore, 
as shown in FIG. 36, the compressed mode frame is 
transmitted at a higher .transmission power than the 
frame in normal transmission. As a consequence, trans-
mission quality can be maintained even in frame trans-
mission in compressed mode. 
[0011] In addition to the application mentioned above, 
as an example of pertinent literature there is Gustafsson, 
M. et al: "Compressed Mode Techniques for Inter-Fre-
quency Measurements in a Wide-band DS-CDMA Sys-
tem", Proc. of 8th IEEE PIMRC 97. This research paper 
discloses techniques for realizing compressed mode in 
cases other than when the spreading factor is lowered, 
namely when the coding rate is increased, when multi-
code transmission is used, and when a multi-bit trans-
mission modulation system such as 16QAM is used. 
[0012] However, in conventional examples such as the 
application mentioned above, since transmissions are in-
terleaved in units of one frame and within one frame, the 
interleaving time for slotted transmission (in the com-
pressed mode) is more compressed than in normal trans-
mission. Consequently, the interleaving size is shortened 

1 
2 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

3 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

which leads to a problem of poor decoding at the recep-
tion side. Document WO9623369 discloses a CDMA 
handover where the power of the compressed signal is 
kept constantly higher than the uncompressed one. 
[0013] Furthermore, in conventional examples such as 
the literature mentioned above, since the length of inter-
leaving time is shortened when using compressed mode 
transmission, there is increased deterioration of signal 
quality with respect to fading, and, since no TPC (trans-
mission power control) command bit is sent during non-
transmission, it is not possible to achieve high-speed 
TPC, leaving a subsequent problem of poor signal qual-
ity. 
[0014] Furthermore, in conventional examples such as 
the application and literature mentioned above, the 
spreading factor is lowered when carrying out a com-
pressed mode transmission. However, in general, low-
ering of the spreading factor indicates that a spreading 
code having a short code-length is being used. However, 
since the number of spreading codes that can be used 
is directly proportional to the square of the code-length, 
there is a problem that there are extremely few spreading 
codes having short code-lengths, and these spreading 
code resources, which are vital for realizing compressed 
mode transmission, are consumed. 
[0015] It is an object of the present invention to solve 
the problems described above by providing a spread 
spectrum communication device and a spread spectrum 
communication method capable of preventing deteriora-
tion in signal quality caused by compressed mode, with 
respect to interleaving, transmission power control, 
spreading code allocation methods and the like to mini-
mize the effects of transmission errors. 

DISCLOSURE OF THE INVENTION 

[0016] A communication method applied to a mobile 
communication system and to a base station in a code 
division multiple access system is disclosed as in the 
appended claims 1 to 3. 

BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS 

[0017] 

FIG. 1 is a block diagram showing a CDMA system 
according to a first example of the present invention; 
FIG. 2 is a diagram explaining memory distribution 
of an interleaver according to the first example; FIG. 
3 is a diagram explaining frame transmission of a 
downlink according to the first example; FIG. 4 is a 
flowchart explaining a transmission operation in a 
normal mode according to the first example; FIG. 5 
is a flowchart explaining a transmission operation in 
a compressed mode according to the first example; 
FIG. 6 is a flowchart explaining a reception operation 
in the normal mode according to the first example; 
FIG. 7 is a flowchart explaining a reception operation 

in the compressed mode according to the first ex-
ample; FIG. 8 is a block diagram showing primary 
parts of a CDMA system according to a second ex-
ample of the present invention; FIG. 9 is a diagram 
explaining frame transmission of a downlink accord-
ing to the second example; FIG. 10 is a flowchart 
explaining a transmission operation in the com-
pressed mode according to the second example; 
FIG. 11 is a flowchart explaining a reception opera-
tion in the compressed mode according to the sec-
ond example; FIG. 12 is a diagram explaining frame 
transmission of a downlink according to a third ex-
ample; FIG. 13 is a flowchart explaining a transmis-
sion operation in the compressed mode according 
to the third example; FIG. 14 is a flowchart explaining 
a reception operation in the compressed mode ac-
cording to the third example; FIG. 15 is a block dia-
gram showing a CDMA system according to a fourth 
embodiment of the present invention; FIG. 16 is a 
diagram explaining memory distribution of a framing/ 
spreading unit according to the fourth example; FIG. 
17 is a diagram explaining frame transmission of a 
downlink according to the fourth example; FIG. 18 
is a flowchart explaining a transmission operation in 
the compressed mode according to the fourth exam-
ple; FIG. 19 is a flowchart explaining a reception op-
eration in compressed mode according to the fourth 
example; FIG. 20 is a block diagram of a CDMA sys-
tem according to a fifth example of the present in-
vention; FIG. 21 is a diagram explaining frame trans-
mission of a downlink according to the fifth example; 
FIG. 22 is a flowchart explaining a transmission op-
eration in the compressed mode according to the 
fifth example; FIG. 23 is a flowchart explaining a re-
ception operation in the compressed mode accord-
ing to the fifth example; FIG. 24 is a diagram explain-
ing frame transmission of a downlink according to a 
sixth example of the present invention; FIG. 25 is a 
flowchart explaining a transmission operation in the 
compressed mode according to the sixth example; 
FIG. 26 is a flowchart explaining a reception opera-
tion in the compressed mode according to the sixth 
example; FIG. 27 is a block diagram showing a CD-
MA system according to a seventh example of the 
present invention; FIG. 28 is a diagram showing the 
relationship between transmission power control 
symbol and transmission power control amount ac-
cording to the seventh example; FIG. 29 is a flow-
chart explaining a transmission power control oper-
ation in the compressed mode according to the sev-
enth example; FIG. 30 is a diagram showing the re-
lationship between transmission power control sym-
bol and transmission power control amount accord-
ing to an eighth example of the present invention; 
FIG. 31 is a flowshart explaining a transmission pow-
er control operation in the compressed mode accord-
ing to the eighth example; FIG. 32 is a block diagram 
showing a CDMA system according to a ninth exam-

3 
4 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

4 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

ple of the present invention; FIG. 33 is a diagram 
explaining frame transmission of a downlink accord-
ing to the ninth example; FIG. 34 is a flowchart ex-
plaining a transmission power control operation in 
the compressed mode according to the ninth exam-
ple of the present invention; FIG. 35 is a flowchart 
explaining a compressed mode control operation ac-
cording to the ninth example; FIG. 36 is a diagram 
explaining conventional frame transmission of a 
downlink; FIG. 37 is a diagram showing a frame con-
stitution of a broadcast channel (BCH); FIG. 38 is a 
detailed example of detecting a second search code 
in sixteen consecutive slots; FIG. 39 is a table show-
ing a correspondence between the second search 
codes and the scrambling code groups; FIG. 40 is a 
flowchart when synchronization establishment pro-
cedure is carried out at the mobile station side; FIG. 
41 is a diagram showing a constitution of a receiver 
according to a tenth example of the present inven-
tion; FIG. 42 is a diagram showing an outline of the 
operation of a receiver according to the present in-
vention; FIG. 43 is a flowchart when synchronization 
establishment procedure is carried out at the mobile 
station side in a handover between different frequen-
cies W-CDMA/W-CDMA; FIG. 44 shows an example 
of obtaining a second search code; FIG. 45 shows 
an example of obtaining a second search code; FIG. 
46 shows an example of obtaining a second search 
code; FIG. 47 shows an example of obtaining a sec-
ond search code; FIG. 48 shows constitution of a 
GSM superframe; and FIG. 49 is a flowchart when 
synchronization establishment procedure is carried 
out at the mobile station side in a handover between 
W-CDMA/W-CDMA of different frequencies. 

BEST MODES FOR CARRYING OUT THE INVENTION 

[0018] To explain the present invention in more detail, 
it will be described with reference to the accompanying 
drawings. 
[0019] To begin with, the constitution of a CDMA sys-
tem will be explained. FIG. 1 is a block diagram showing 
a CDMA system according to a first example of the 
present invention. The CDMA system comprises a trans-
mitter 1A and a receiver 2A. Such a CDMA system is 
provided with both base station and mobile stations. The 
base station and the mobile stations carry out radio com-
munication using a CDMA communication method. 
[0020] The transmitter 1A, as shown in FIG. 1, com-
prises a controller 11A, an error-correction encoder 12, 
an interleaver 13, a framing/ spreading unit 14A, a radio 
frequency transmitter 15, etc. Through negotiations with 
the receiver 2A, the controller 11A principally controls 
the operations of the interleaver 13, the framing/ spread-
ing unit 14A, and the radio frequency transmitter 15. 
Through negotiations with the receiver 2A, this controller 
11A instructs, using frame numbers, objects for interleav-
ing appropriate for a normal mode (a non-compressed 

mode) and compressed mode. Furthermore, this control-
ler 11A instructs a transmission timing to the framing/ 
spreading unit 14A, in order to reduce the spreading fac-
tor and transmit a compressed mode frame in the com-
pressed mode. Furthermore, the controller 11A instructs 
to the radio frequency transmitter 15 to increase the av-
erage transmission power when transmitting the com-
pressed mode frame. 
[0021] The error-correction encoder 12 error-correct 
encodes the transmitted data stream, thereby obtaining 
coded data. In order to be able to minimize the effect of 
transmission errors when continuous bits of a transmitted 
signal are lost or the like, for instance as a result of fading, 
the interleaver 13 interleaves the temporal sequence of 
the coded data in bit units. 
[0022] This interleaver 13 has a memory for interleav-
ing two frames. When the controller 11A has instructed 
frame number "1" for interleaving, the interleaver 13 in-
terleaves one frame in the normal mode. On the other 
hand, when the frame number "2" has been instructed, 
the interleaver 13 interleaves across two frames in the 
compressed mode. 
[0023] The framing/ spreading unit 14A spreads the 
band in correspondence with the normal mode and the 
compressed mode, using a spreading code for each user, 
and forms a frame corresponding to each mode. When 
the controller 11A has instructed transmission timing in 
correspondence with each of the modes, the framing/ 
spreading unit 14A sends the frame to the radio frequen-
cy transmitter 15 in accordance with the instructed trans-
mission timing. 
[0024] Furthermore, in the compressed mode, the 
framing/ spreading unit 14A receives a command from 
the controller 11A to reduce the spreading factor, and 
obtains a transmission signal using a lower spreading 
factor than the normal mode, in accordance with that 
command. The radio frequency transmitter 15 converts 
the transmission signal obtained by the framing/ spread-
ing unit 14A to a radio frequency, and transmits it. In 
compliance with the controller 11A, this radio frequency 
transmitter 15 outputs the transmission signal after in-
creasing the average transmission power in the com-
pressed mode to higher than that in the normal mode. 
[0025] As shown in FIG. 1, the receiver 2A comprises 
a controller 21A, an error-correction decoder 22, a dein-
terleaver 23, a deframing/de-spreading unit 24A, a radio 
frequency receiver 25, etc. Through negotiations with the 
transmitter 1A, the controller 21A principally controls the 
operations of the deinterleaver 23 and the deframing/de-
spreading unit 24A. Through negotiations with the trans-
mitter 1A, the controller 21A specifies, using frame num-
bers, objects for deinterleaving appropriate for the normal 
mode and the compressed mode. Furthermore, this con-
troller 21A instructs a transmission timing to the defram-
ing/de-spreading unit 24A, in order to reduce the spread-
ing factor and transmit a compressed mode frame in the 
compressed mode. Furthermore, in the compressed 
mode, the controller 11A instructs to the radio frequency 

5 
6 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

5 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

transmitter 15 a decrease in the spreading factor and a 
reception timing for receiving the compressed mode 
frame. 
[0026] The radio frequency receiver 25 demodulates 
received signals sent from an antenna not shown in the 
diagram. The deframing/de-spreading unit 24A de-
spreads using spreading codes allocated to the users of 
the receiver 2A in correspondence with normal mode and 
compressed mode, and creates a frame for each mode. 
When the controller 21A specifies the reception timings 
for each mode, the deframing/de-spreading unit 24A ex-
tracts a reception signal from the radio frequency receiver 
25 at the instructed timing. Furthermore, in the com-
pressed, mode, the deframing/ de-spreading unit 24A 
receives a command from the controller 11A to reduce 
the spreading factor, and obtains a reception signal using 
a lower spreading factor than in the normal mode, in ac-
cordance with that command. 
[0027] The deinterleaver 23 interleaves the temporal 
sequence of the coded data in bit units, in the reverse 
order to the interleaving in the transmitter 1A (deinter-
leaving). Like the interleaver 13 mentioned above, the 
deinterleaver 23 has a memory for deinterleaving two 
frames. When the controller 21A has instructed frame 
number "1" for deinterleaving, the deinterleaver 23 dein-
terleaves one frame in normal mode. On the other hand, 
when the frame number "2" has been instructed, the dein-
terleaver 23 deinterleaves across two frames in the com-
pressed mode. The error-correction decoder 22 error-
correct decodes the deinterleaved signal, thereby obtain-
ing a decoded data, i.e. a received data stream. 
[0028] Next, the interleaver 13 and the deinterleaver 
23 will be explained. FIG. 2 is a diagram explaining mem-
ory distribution of the interleaver according to the first 
example, FIG. 2 (a) illustrates the area used in normal 
mode, and FIG. 2 (b) illustrates the area used in com-
pressed mode. In FIG. 2, a memory 131A provided with 
the interleaver 13 is shown. The deinterleaver 23 also 
comprises a memory having the same memory size as 
that of the interleaver 13. In the first , since interleaving 
is performed across two frames in the compressed mode, 
two-frame memory sizes in correspondence with an in-
terleaving size corresponding to two frames are set in 
the interleaver 13 and the deinterleaver 23 respectively. 
[0029] When interleaving (see FIG. 2 (a)) in normal 
mode, only one frame (half) of the memory 131A is used, 
and interleaving is performed within that frame. By con-
trast, in compressed mode (see FIG. 2 (b)), two frames 
(all) of the memory 131A are used, and interleaving is 
performed in those two frames. Similarly, in the deinter-
leaver 23, the area of memory used is altered in corre-
spondence with the mode, as in the interleaver: 
[0030] Next, frame transmission including com-
pressed mode will be explained. FIG. 3 is a diagram ex-
plaining frame transmission of a downlink according to 
the first . In FIG. 3, the vertical axis represents transmis-
sion rate/ transmission power, and the horizontal axis rep-
resents time. Furthermore, in FIG. 3, F represents one 

frame. In a CDMA system, during normal transmission, 
a period of time is provided to slot the frame and transmit 
it intermittently, and the strength of the other frequency 
carriers is measured using non-transmission duration 
during that period. 
[0031] For this purpose, the slotted frame must be 
compressed, and as shown in FIG. 3, the transmission 
duration of a compressed frame is half of the normal 
transmission duration. In this case, if interleaving is per-
formed in the same manner as in normal transmission, 
there will only be half the necessary interleaving time, 
making it impossible to achieve adequate interleaving 
effects. 
[0032] Accordingly, to secure sufficient time for inter-
leaving, in compressed mode the transmitter 1A and the 
receiver 2A double the areas used in the memories of 
the interleaver 13 and the deinterleaver 23, and inter-
leave across two frames. The interleaving time needed 
in compressed mode can be determined easily from the 
ratio between the size of one frame and the compressed 
mode frame. 
[0033] Next, the transmission operation of the trans-
mitter 1A will be explained. FIG. 4 is a flowchart explain-
ing a transmission operation in normal mode, and FIG. 
5 is a flowchart explaining a transmission operation in 
compressed mode. The execution of the operations of 
FIG. 4 and FIG. 5 is controlled by the controller 11A, the 
individual operations being performed by various sec-
tions. 
[0034] In the normal mode (see FIG. 4), frame number 
"1" is instructed to the interleaver 13 (Step S101), and 
the interleaver 13 interleaves one frame. Then, when the 
time interleaver 13 interleaves one frame. Then, when 
the time reaches to a time required for transmitting one 
frame (Step) S102), a transmission on next frame is in-
structed to the framing/ spreading unit 14A (Step S103). 
In this way, in normal mode, frames are transmitted con-
tinuously. 
[0035] Furthermore, in the compressed mode (see 
FIG. 5), multiple frames, that is, frame number "2" is in-
structed to the interleaver 13 (Step S111), and the inter-
leaver 13 interleaves across two frames. Then, when the 
time reaches to a time required for transmitting a half-
frame, that is, compressed mode frame timing (Step 
S112), a. reduction in the spreading factor and a trans-
mission timing are instructed to the framing/ spreading 
unit 14A (Step S113). Moreover, an increase in the av-
erage transmission power is instructed to the radio fre-
quency transmitter 15 (Step S114). In this way, in the 
compressed mode, frames are transmitted intermittently 
(non-continuously). 
[0036] Next, the reception operation of the receiver 2A 
will be explained. FIG. 6 is a flowchart explaining the 
reception operation in normal mode, and FIG. 7 is a di-
agram explaining the reception operation in compressed 
mode. The operations of FIG. 6 and FIG. 7 are executed 
under the control of the controller 21A although the indi-
vidual operations are performed by various sections. In 

7 
8 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

6 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

the normal mode (see FIG. 6), when the time reaches 
one frame timing (Step S121), a reception timing is in-
structed to the deframing/de-spreading unit 24A (Step 
S122). Then, a frame number "1" is instructed to the dein-
terleaver 23 (Step S123), and the deinterleaver 23 dein-
terleaves one frame. In this way, in normal mode, frames 
are received continuously. 
[0037] Furthermore, in the compressed mode (see 
FIG. 7), when the time reaches a half-frame, that is, com-
pressed mode frame timing (Step S131), a reduction in 
the spreading factor and a reception timing are instructed 
to deframing/de-spreading unit 24A (Step S132). Then, 
multiple frames, that is, frame number "2" is instructed 
to the deinterleaver 23 (Step S133), and the deinterleaver 
23 deinterleaves across two frames. In this way, in the 
compressed mode, frames are received intermittently 
(non-continuously). 
[0038] As described above, according to the first ex-
ample, in compressed mode, interleaving bit units cross-
ing multiple frames are controlled in order to minimize 
the effects of transmission errors, thereby making it pos-
sible to secure appropriate interleaving time in the com-
pressed mode as in the normal mode. As a consequence, 
it is possible to prevent poor performance caused by in-
terleaving of bit units. 
[0039] Furthermore, since the memory size corre-
sponds to the number of frames to be interleaved in the 
compressed mode, it is possible to interleave bits units 
in a number of frames sufficient to minimize the effects 
of transmission errors when transmission in the com-
pressed mode. 
[0040] In the first example described above, the size 
of the memory for interleaving and deinterleaving in the 
compressed mode is increased, securing an appropriate 
interleaving time in correspondence with the size of the 
interleaving, but the present invention is not restricted to 
this, and it is acceptable to secure an appropriate inter-
leaving time by changing the method of transmitting the 
compressed mode frame without increasing the size of 
the memory, as in a second example explained later. 
Since the entire constitution of the second example of 
the present invention is the same as the first embodiment 
already explained, the following description covers only 
those features of the constitution and operation which 
differ from the first example. Furthermore, identical com-
ponents are represented by the same reference numer-
als. 
[0041] Here, only the primary constitution will be ex-
plained. FIG. 8 is a block diagram showing primary parts 
of a CDMA system according to the second example of 
the present invention. In the CDMA system of the second 
embodiment, the difference from the first example al-
ready described is the size of the memory 131B of the 
interleaver 13, which here is one frame. Furthermore, 
although not depicted in the diagram, the deinterleaver 
23 of the receiver also has a memory size of one frame, 
to match that of the interleaver 13. 
[0042] Next, frame transmission including the com-

pressed mode will be explained. FIG. 9 is a diagram ex-
plaining frame transmission of a downlink according to 
the second embodiment. In FIG. 9, the vertical axis rep-
resents transmission rate/ transmission power, and the 
horizontal axis represents time. In the CDMA system, 
during normal transmission, a period of time is provided 
to slot the frame and transmit it intermittently, and the 
strength of the other frequency carriers is measured us-
ing the fact that frames are not transmitted during that 
period. For this purpose, the slotted frame must be com-
pressed, but if interleaving is performed in the same man-
ner as in normal transmission, the interleaving time will 
be insufficient, and it will be impossible to obtain an ade 
quate interleaving effect. 
[0043] Accordingly, the transmission timing of the 
compressed frame is divided, and one part is allocated 
to the head of the frame, the other is allocated to the end 
of the same frame, securing the desired interleaving time. 
At the receiver, this operation is performed in reverse. 
As in the first example, the time needed for interleaving 
in compressed mode can be determined easily from the 
ratio between the size of one frame and the compressed 
mode frame. 
[0044] Next, the operation will be explained. Here, only 
the operation in compressed mode will be explained. FIG. 
10 is a flowchart explaining the transmission operation 
in compressed mode, and FIG. 11 is a flowchart explain-
ing the reception operation in compressed mode. In the 
compressed mode (see FIG. 10) at the transmitter, inter-
leaving in one frame is instructed to the interleaver 13 
(Step S201), and the interleaver 13 interleaves one 
frame. 
[0045] Then, when the time reaches any one of the 
front and rear timings of the one-frame timing (Step 
S202), a transmission timing is instructed to the framing/ 
spreading unit 14A (Step S203). Moreover, an increase 
in the average transmission power is instructed to the 
radio frequency transmitter 15 (Step S204), and the com-
pressed mode frame is frame-transmitted at high trans-
mission power. In this way, frames are transmitted inter-
mittently (non-continuously) in the compressed mode. 
[0046] On the other hand, in the compressed mode at 
the receiver (see FIG. 11), when the time reaches any 
one of the front and rear timings of the one-frame timing 
(Step S211), a reception timing is instructed to the de-
framing/de-spreading unit 24A (Step S212). Then, after 
the signal of one frame has been received, a one-frame 
deinterleaving is instructed to the deinterleaver 23 (Step 
S213), and the deinterleaver 23 deinterleaves one frame. 
In this way, frames are received intermittently (non-con-
tinuously) in the compressed mode. 
[0047] As explained above, according to the second 
example, in the compressed mode, a frame which has 
been interleaved in bit units is compressed, arranged into 
front and rear in the same frame timing as in normal 
mode, and intermittently transmitted in compliance with 
that arrangement. Therefore, it is possible to secure an 
appropriate interleaving time in compressed mode, in the 

9 
10 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

7 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

same way as in normal mode, with a simple interleaving 
constitution. Consequently, poor performance caused by 
interleaving in bit units can be prevented. 
[0048] Furthermore, it is also possible in the second 
example to prepare the memory sizes shown in FIG. 2, 
and control interleaving of bit units crossing multiple 
frames in the compressed mode. In this case, as in the 
first example described above, it is possible to secure an 
appropriate interleaving time in the compressed mode, 
as in the normal mode, and to reduce transmission errors 
resulting from interleaving in bit units. 
[0049] In the first example already explained, to per-
form interleaving and deinterleaving in the compressed 
mode, the size of memory is increased and an interleav-
ing time appropriate for the size of the interleaving is se-
cured, but the present invention is not restricted to this, 
and it is acceptable to secure an appropriate interleaving 
time by a compressed mode frame transmission method 
different to that of the second example described above, 
as in a third example described below. Since the entire 
constitution of the third example of the present invention 
is the same as the second example already explained, 
the following description covers only those features of 
the operation which differ from the second example. 
[0050] Firstly, frame transmission including com-
pressed mode will be explained. FIG. 12 is a diagram 
explaining frame transmission of a downlink according 
to the third example. In FIG. 12, the vertical axis repre-
sents transmission rate/ transmission power, and the hor-
izontal axis represents time. In the CDMA system, during 
normal transmission, a period of time is provided to slot 
the frame and transmit intermittently, and the strength of 
other frequency carriers is measured using the fact that 
frames are not transmitted during that period. For this 
purpose, the slotted frame must be compressed, but if 
interleaving is performed in the same manner as in nor-
mal transmission, there will only be half the necessary 
interleaving time, making it impossible to achieve ade-
quate interleaving effects. 
[0051] Accordingly, the transmission, duration of the 
compressed frame is divided in correspondence with 
multiple slots, and the non-transmission period (idle pe-
riod for measuring) is reduced so as not to affect the 
transmission power control, securing the desired time for 
interleaving. In the receiver, this operation is performed 
in reverse. As in the first example, the time needed for 
interleaving in compressed mode can be determined 
easily from the ratio between the size of one frame and 
the compressed mode frame. 
[0052] Furthermore, the slot number N (where N is a 
natural number) forming the transmission unit in com-
pressed mode is determined in accordance with the re-
lationship between the measuring time of the strength of 
other frequency carriers and the transmission power con-
trol margin of error. For instance, when N = 1 it indicates 
every slot, N = 2 indicates every two slots, and N = 4 
indicates every four slots. Here, N = 1, 2, and 4 are just 
the examples and it is also possible to handle other slot 

numbers. 
[0053] Next, the operation will be explained. Here, only 
the operation in compressed mode will be explained. FIG. 
13 is a flowchart explaining the transmission operation 
in compressed mode, and FIG. 14 is a flowchart explain-
ing the reception operation in compressed mode. In the 
compressed mode at the transmitter (see FIG. 13), inter-
leaving in one frame is instructed to the interleaver 13 
and the interleaver 13 interleaves one frame (Step S301). 
[0054] Then, when the time reaches the N slot timing 
which forms the transmission unit in the compressed 
mode (Step S302), a transmission timing is instructed to 
the framing/ spreading unit 14A (Step S303). Moreover, 
an increase in the average transmission power is instruct-
ed to the radio frequency transmitter 15 (Step S304), and 
the compressed mode frame is frame-transmitted at high 
transmission power. In this way, frames are transmitted 
intermittently (non-continuously) in the compressed 
mode. 
[0055] On the other hand, in the compressed mode of 
the receiver (see FIG. 14), when the time reaches the N 
slot timing (Step S311), a reception timing is instructed 
to the deframing/de-spreading unit 24A (Step S312). 
Then, after the signal of one frame has been received, a 
one-frame deinterleaving is instructed to the deinterleav-
er 23 (Step S313), and the deinterleaver 23 deinterleaves 
one frame. In this way, frames are received intermittently 
(non-continuously) in the compressed mode. 
[0056] As explained above, according to the third em-
bodiment, in the compressed mode, since a compressed 
frame is slotted and intermittently transmitted in N slot 
units, it is possible to receive transmission power control 
bits transmission in the downlink in comparatively short 
time intervals. In this way, by controlling ON/OFF of each 
N. slot, the margin of error of transmission power control 
can be reduced. 
[0057] In particular, since the N slot unit is determined 
in accordance with the relationship between the meas-
uring time of the strength of other frequency carriers and 
the transmission power control margin of error, it is pos-
sible to secure time in which the strength of other fre-
quency carriers can be reliably measured, and also to 
reduce the transmission power control margin of error. 
[0058] Furthermore, it is also possible in the third ex-
ample to prepare the memory sizes shown in FIG. 2, and 
control interleaving of bit units across multiple frames in 
the compressed mode. In this case, as in the first example 
described above, it is possible to secure an appropriate 
interleaving time in the compressed mode, as in the nor-
mal mode, and to further reduce transmission errors re-
sulting from interleaving in bit units. 
[0059] In the examples one to three described above, 
the frame timing was changed in the normal mode and 
the compressed mode, but the present invention is not 
restricted to this, and it is acceptable to intermittently 
transmit with the same frame timing in compressed mode 
and normal mode, as in a fourth example of the present 
invention described below. 

11 
12 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

8 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

[0060] Firstly, the constitution of the CDMA system will 
be explained. FIG. 15 is a block diagram showing a CD-
MA system according to the fourth example of the present 
invention. The CDMA system comprises a transmitter 1B 
and a receiver 2B. Such a CDMA system is provided with 
both base station and mobile stations. The base station 
and the mobile stations carry out radio communication 
using a CDMA communication method. 
[0061] The transmitter 1B, as shown in FIG. 15, com-
prises a controller 11B, an error-correction encoder 12, 
an interleaver 13, a framing/ spreading unit 14B, a radio 
frequency transmitter 15, etc. Through negotiations with 
the receiver 2B, the controller 11B mainly controls the 
operations of the interleaver 13, the framing/ spreading 
unit 14B, and the radio frequency transmitter 15. In com-
pressed mode, this controller 11B instructs to the fram-
ing/ spreading unit 14B multi-code transmission for mul-
tiple frames to be code-multiplexed and transmission tim-
ings for transmitting compressed mode frames. 
[0062] The error-correction encoder 12, the interleaver 
13, and the radio frequency transmitter 15 are the same 
as in the first example already described above, and ex-
planation thereof will be omitted. As regards the inter-
leaver 13, it has a memory for interleaving one frame. 
[0063] The framing/ spreading unit 14B spreads the 
band in correspondence with normal mode and com-
pressed mode, using a spreading code for each user, 
and forms a frame corresponding to each mode. When 
the controller 11B has instructed transmission timing in 
correspondence with each of the modes, the framing/ 
spreading unit 14B sends the frame to the radio frequen-
cy transmitter 15 in accordance with the instructed trans-
mission timing. Furthermore, in the compressed mode, 
the framing/ spreading unit 14B receives a command for 
multi-code transmission from the controller 11B, and 
code-multiplexes two post-interleave frames in accord-
ance with that command. 
[0064] In order to code-multiplex two frames, the fram-
ing/ spreading unit 14B has a one-frame memory. That 
is, the interleaver 13 and the framing/ spreading unit 14B 
each comprise a one-frame memory, enabling two 
frames to be code-multiplexed using a total memory size 
equivalent to two frames. 
[0065] The receiver 2B, as shown in FIG. 15, compris-
es a controller 21B, an error-correction decoder 22, a 
deinterleaver 23, a deframing/de-spreading unit 24B, a 
radio frequency receiver 25, etc. Through negotiations 
with the transmitter 1B, the controller 21B mainly controls 
the operations of the deinterleaver 23 and the defram-
ing/de-spreading unit 24B. In the compressed mode, this 
controller 21B instructs the deframing/de-spreading unit 
24B of reception timings for receiving multi-code trans-
mission and compressed mode frames. 
[0066] The error-correction decoder 22, the deinter-
leaver 23, and the radio frequency transmitter 25 are the 
same as in the first example already described above, 
and explanation thereof will be omitted. As regards the 
deinterleaver 23, it has a memory for interleaving one 

frame. 
[0067] Like the framing/ spreading unit 14B described 
above, the deframing/de-spreading unit 24B comprises 
a one-frame memory for deframing. When the controller 
21B has instructed a reception timing in correspondence 
with each of the modes, the deframing/de-spreading unit 
24B extracts the reception signal from the radio frequen-
cy transmitter 25 in accordance with that reception timing. 
Furthermore, in the compressed mode, the defram-
ing/de-spreading unit 24B receives a command for multi-
code transmission from the controller 21B, separates the 
de-spread data into frame units in accordance with that 
command, and outputs the frames in sequence to the 
deinterleaver 23. 
[0068] Next, the primary constitution of the framing/ 
spreading unit 14B and the deframing/de-spreading unit 
24B will be explained. FIG. 16 is a diagram explaining 
memory distribution of the framing/ spreading unit 14B 
according to the fourth example, wherein FIG. 16 (a) il-
lustrates the area used in normal mode, and FIG. 16 (b) 
illustrates the area used in compressed mode. In FIG. 
16, the framing/ spreading unit 14B has a memory 141A. 
The deframing/de-spreading unit 24B also has a memory 
of the same memory size as that of the framing/ spreading 
unit 14B. 
[0069] In the fourth example, since code-multiplexing 
is performed across two frames in the compressed mode, 
a one-frame memory size, in correspondence with a two-
frame code-multiplexing size, is set in the both framing/ 
spreading unit 14B and the deframing/de-spreading unit 
24B. In fact, two-frame framing and deframing can be 
achieved using the one-frame memories of the interleav-
er 13 the deinterleaver 23. 
[0070] In normal mode (see FIG. 16 (a)), since code-
multiplexing is not needed, framing and the like is carried 
out based on data interleaved by the interleaver 13 with-
out using the memory 141A. On the contrary, in com-
pressed mode (see FIG. 16 (b)), a two-frame memory 
size is required to perform code-multiplexing, and there-
fore the memory 141A of the framing/ spreading unit 14B 
is used in addition to the memory of the interleaver 13. 
Similarly, whether the memory is used or not in the de-
framing/de-spreading unit 24B also varies depending on 
the mode. 
[0071] Next, frame transmission including com-
pressed mode will be explained. FIG. 17 is a diagram 
explaining frame transmission of a downlink according 
to the fourth embodiment. In FIG. 17, the vertical axis 
represents transmission rate/ transmission power, and 
the horizontal axis represents time. Furthermore, in FIG. 
17, F represents one frame. In the CDMA system, during 
normal transmission, a period of time is provided to slot 
the frame and transmit it intermittently, and the strength 
of other frequency carriers is measured using the fact 
that a frame is not transmitted during that period. 
[0072] For this purpose, the slotted frame must be 
compressed, and in conventional methods, the transmis-
sion duration of a compressed frame becomes half of the 

13 
14 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

9 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

normal transmission duration. In this case, if interleaving 
is performed in the same manner as in normal transmis-
sion, there will only be half of the necessary interleaving 
time, making it impossible to achieve adequate interleav-
ing effects. 
[0073] Accordingly, the transmitter 1B performs inter-
leaving of the same size as in the normal mode, and 
code-multiplexes multiple frames in the frame timing, in 
order to secure the same timing for interleaving in the 
compressed mode as in the normal mode, in compressed 
mode. For instance, in the example shown in FIG. 17, in 
normal transmission (normal mode), post-interleaving 
frames are transmitted in a sequence of frames #1, #2, 
and thereafter, in slotted transmission (compressed 
mode), individually interleaved frames #3 and, #4 are 
code-multiplexed together, and compressed frames are 
transmitted. 
[0074] Next, the operation will be explained. Since the 
transmission and reception is performed in the same 
manner as the conventional methods, explanation there-
of will be omitted. Firstly, the transmission operation of 
the transmitter 1B will be explained. FIG. 18 is a flowchart 
explaining the transmission operation in compressed 
mode. The execution of the operation of FIG. 18 is con-
trolled by the controller 11B although individual opera-
tions are performed by various sections. In the com-
pressed mode, interleaving in one frame is instructed to 
the interleaver 13 (Step S401), and the interleaver 13 
interleaves in one frame. 
[0075] Then, when the time reaches a given frame tim-
ing for multi-code transmission (Step S402), multi-code 
transmission and transmission timings are instructed to 
the framing/ spreading unit 14B (Step S403). Conse-
quently, the framing/ spreading unit 14B code-multiplex-
es two frames. In this way, in the compressed mode, 
frames are transmitted intermittently (non-continuously). 
[0076] Next, the reception operation of the receiver 2B 
will be explained.. FIG. 19 is a flowchart explaining the 
reception operation in the compressed mode. The exe-
cution of the operation of FIG. 19 is controlled by the 
controller 21B although individual operations are per-
formed by various sections. In the compressed mode, 
when the time reaches the frame timing for the multi-code 
transmission described above (Step S411), frame sep-
aration of received code-multiplexed data and a recep-
tion timing are instructed to the deframing/de-spreading 
unit 24B (Step S412). 
[0077] Then, deinterleaving in the separated frames is 
instructed to the deinterleaver 23 (Step S413), and the 
deinterleaver 23 deinterleaves one frame. In this way, in 
the compressed mode, frames are received intermittently 
(non-continuously). 
[0078] As described above, according to the fourth ex-
ample, in the compressed mode multiple frames which 
have been interleaved in bit units to minimize the effects 
of transmission errors are compressed by code division 
multiplexing in the given frame timing prior to transmis-
sion. Therefore, it is possible to secure an appropriate 

interleaving time in the same way and using the same 
constitution in the compressed mode and the normal 
mode. In this way, by controlling ON/OFF in each com-
pressed mode frame, poor performance caused by inter-
leaving in bit units can be prevented. 
[0079] Furthermore, since the memory size used cor-
responds to the number of frames to be code-multiplexed 
in the compressed mode, code-multiplexing can be per-
formed reliably and without loss in the compressed mode. 
[0080] Furthermore, it is also possible in the fourth ex-
ample to control interleaving of bit units across multiple 
frames in the compressed mode in the way as the first 
example described above. In this case, it is possible to 
secure a longer time for interleaving by increasing the 
size of the memories of the interleaver and the deinter-
leaver in compressed mode than in the normal mode. As 
a consequence, transmission errors resulting from inter-
leaving in bit units can be reduced. In particular, when 
code-multiplexed frames are interleaved by replacing 
other frames, places where multiple code-multiplexed 
frames are in error can be dispersed, improving the cor-
recting result of the error-correction coding. 
[0081] In the examples 1 to 4 described above, trans-
mission power is increased in order to transmit frames 
in the compressed mode without information loss, but 
the present invention is not restricted to this, and it is 
acceptable to determine the amount of the transmission 
power after considering interference on other user chan-
nels caused by the amount of the transmission power, 
as described below in a fifth example. 
[0082] Firstly, the constitution of the CDMA system will 
be explained. FIG. 20 is a block diagram showing a CD-
MA system according to a fifth example of the present 
invention. The CDMA system comprises a transmitter 1C 
and a receiver 2C. Such a CDMA system is provided with 
both base station and mobile stations. The base station 
and the mobile stations carry out radio communication 
using a CDMA communication method. 
[0083] As shown in FIG. 20, the transmitter 1C com-
prises a controller 11C, an error-correction encoder 12, 
an interleaver 13, a framing/ spreading unit 14C, a radio 
frequency transmitter 15, etc. Through negotiations with 
the receiver 2C, the controller 11C mainly controls the 
operations of the interleaver 13, the framing/ spreading 
unit 14C, and the radio frequency transmitter 15. In com-
pressed mode, this controller 11C instructs to the fram-
ing/ spreading unit 14C a reduction of information rate 
and transmission timings for transmitting compressed 
mode frames. Furthermore, this controller 11C differs 
from the one in examples 1 to 4 described above in that 
it does not generate a command to the radio frequency 
transmitter 15 to raise the transmission power in the com-
pressed mode. 
[0084] The error-correction encoder 12, the interleaver 
13, and the radio frequency transmitter 15 are the same 
as in the first example already described above, and ex-
planation thereof will be omitted. As regards the inter-
leaver 13, it has a memory for interleaving one frame. 

15 
16 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

10 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

[0085] The framing/ spreading unit 14C spreads the 
band in correspondence with normal mode and com-
pressed mode, using a spreading code for each user, 
and forms a frame corresponding to each mode. When 
the controller 11C has instructed a transmission timing 
in correspondence with each of the mode, the framing/ 
spreading unit 14C sends the frame to the radio frequen-
cy transmitter 15 in accordance with that transmission 
timing. Furthermore, in the compressed mode, when the 
framing/ spreading unit 14C receive a command to re-
duce the information rate from the controller 11C then it 
compresses the insufficiently interleaved frame to form 
a compressed mode frame in compliance with that com-
mand. 
[0086] As shown in FIG. 20, the receiver 2C comprises 
a controller 21C, an error-correction decoder 22, a dein-
terleaver 23, a deframing/de-spreading unit 24C, a radio 
frequency transmitter 25, etc. Through negotiations with 
the transmitter 1C, the controller 21C mainly controls the 
operations of the deinterleaver 23 and the deframing/de-
spreading unit 24C. In the compressed mode, this con-
troller 21C instructs to the deframing/de-spreading unit 
24C a reduction in information rate and reception timings 
for receiving compressed mode frames. 
[0087] The error-correction decoder 22, the deinter-
leaver 23, and the radio frequency transmitter 25 are the 
same as in the first example already described above, 
and explanation thereof will be omitted. As regards the 
deinterleaver 23, it has a memory for interleaving one 
frame. 
[0088] When the controller 21C has instructed a re-
ception timing in correspondence with each of the modes, 
the deframing/de-spreading unit 24C extracts the re-
ceived, signal from the radio frequency transmitter 25 in 
accordance with that reception timing. Furthermore, in 
the compressed mode, when the deframing/de-spread-
ing unit 24C receives a command to reduce information 
rate from the controller 21C then it lowers the information 
rate in accordance with that command, performs framing 
and de-spreading, and outputs the frames in sequence 
to the deinterleaver 23. 
[0089] Next, frame transmission including com-
pressed mode will be explained. FIG. 21 is a diagram 
explaining frame transmission of a downlink according 
to the fifth example. In FIG. 21, the vertical axis repre-
sents transmission rate/ transmission power, and the hor-
izontal axis represents time. In the CDMA system, during 
normal transmission, a period of time is provided to slot 
the frame and transmit it intermittently, and the strength 
of other frequency carriers is measured using the fact 
that a frame is not transmitted during that period. For that 
purpose, the slotted frame must be compressed, and in 
a conventional method, the transmission power is in-
creased when transmitting the compressed frame. In this 
case, amount of interference power to other user chan-
nels increases, leading to deterioration in transmission. 
[0090] Accordingly, as shown in FIG. 21, when the 
same transmission power is secured in the compressed 

mode as in the normal mode, lowering the transmission 
rate by a corresponding amount, and an interleaved 
transmission frame is sent across multiple compressed 
mode frames, it is possible to realize a handover between 
frequencies with reduced interference. 
[0091] Next, the operation will be explained. Since the 
transmission and reception is performed in the same 
manner as the conventional methods, explanation there-
of will be omitted. Firstly, the transmission operation of 
the transmitter 1C will be explained. FIG. 22 is a flowchart 
explaining the transmission operation in the compressed 
mode. The execution of the operation of FIG. 22 is con-
trolled by the controller 11C although the individual op-
erations are performed by various sections. In the com-
pressed mode, interleaving in one frame is instructed to 
the interleaver 13 (Step S501), and the interleaver 13 
interleaves in one frame. 
[0092] Then, when the time reaches the compressed 
mode frame timing (Step S502), reduction of transmis-
sion rate and a transmission timing are instructed to the 
framing/ spreading unit 14C (Step S503). Consequently, 
the frame is transmitted at a lower transmission rate in 
the compressed mode time. In this way, in the com-
pressed mode, frames are transmitted intermittently 
(non-continuously). 
[0093] Next, the reception operation of the receiver 2C 
will be explained. FIG. : 23 is a flowchart explaining the 
reception operation in the compressed mode. The exe-
cution of the operation of FIG. 23 is controlled by the 
controller 21C although the individual operations are per-
formed by various sections. In the compressed mode, 
when the time reaches the compressed mode frame tim-
ing (Step S511), a reduction of transmission rate and a 
reception timing are instructed to the deframing/de-
spreading unit 24C (Step S512). 
[0094] Then, deinterleaving in the one frame is in-
structed to the deinterleaver 23 (Step S513), and the 
deinterleaver 23 deinterleaves one frame. In this way, in 
the compressed mode, frames are received intermittently 
(non-continuously). 
[0095] As described above, according to the fifth ex-
ample, in the compressed mode, compressed frames are 
intermittently transmitted at a transmission rate which is 
lower than the transmission rate in the normal mode while 
using the same transmission power as in the normal 
mode. Therefore, during the frequency handover, the 
amount of interference power to other users on the same 
frequency is reduced. Consequently, it is possible to re-
alize a handover between frequencies with less interfer-
ence. 
[0096] Furthermore, in the fifth example, in the com-
pressed mode, a compressed frame may be divided into 
the front and rear of the same frame timing as in the 
normal mode, and transmitted intermittently in compli-
ance with that arrangement, as in the second example 
described above. Because of this fact, it is possible to 
secure an appropriate interleaving time in compressed 
mode in the same way as in the normal mode, with a 

17 
18 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

11 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

simple interleave constitution. As a result, poor perform-
ance caused by interleaving in bit units can be prevented. 
[0097] Furthermore, in the fifth example, in the com-
pressed mode, a compressed frame may be slotted and 
transmitted intermittently in N slot units in the same man-
ner as in the third example described above. Because of 
this fact, it is possible to receive transmission power con-
trol bits transmitted in the downlink in comparatively short 
time intervals. As a result, the amount of error in the trans-
mission power control can be reduced. 
[0098] In the fifth example described above, one frame 
was interleaved, but the present invention is not restricted 
to this, and it is acceptable to prevent compression in the 
interleaving time by interleaving across multiple frames. 
With the exception of increase the memory size of the 
interleaver, as in the first example, the sixth example has 
the same overall constitution as the fifth example de-
scribed above, and so only the differing aspects of the 
operation will be explained below. 
[0099] Accordingly, frame transmission including com-
pressed mode will be explained. FIG. 24 is a diagram 
explaining frame transmission of a downlink according 
to the sixth example. In FIG. 24, the vertical axis repre-
sents transmission rate/ transmission power, and the hor-
izontal axis represents time. The difference with the fifth 
example described above is that, as shown in FIG. 24, 
the interleaving is carried out across multiple frames, i.e. 
two frames if the compressed mode frame is a 1/2 frame. 
Consequently, deterioration of decoding caused by com-
pressing the interleaving time can be reduced. 
[0100] Next, the operation will be explained. Since the 
transmission and reception is performed in the same 
manner as in the conventional methods, explanation 
thereof will be omitted. Firstly, the transmission operation 
of the transmitter of the sixth example will be explained. 
FIG. 25 is a flowchart explaining the transmission oper-
ation in the compressed mode. The execution of the op-
eration of FIG. 25 is controlled by the controller 11C al-
though the individual operations are performed by vari-
ous sections. In the compressed, mode, interleaving 
across two frames is instructed to the interleaver 13 (Step 
S601), and the interleaver 13 interleaves two frames. 
[0101] Then, when the time reaches the compressed 
mode frame timing (Step S602), reduction of transmis-
sion rate and a transmission timing are instructed to the 
framing/ spreading unit 14C (Step S603) . Consequently, 
the frame is transmitted at a lower transmission rate in 
the compressed mode time. In this way, in the com-
pressed mode, frames are transmitted intermittently 
(non-continuously). 
[0102] Next, the reception operation according to the 
receiver of the sixth example will be explained. FIG. 26 
is a flowchart explaining a reception operation in the com-
pressed mode. The execution of the operation of FIG. 26 
is controlled by the controller 21C although the individual 
operations are performed by various sections. In the 
compressed mode, when the time reaches the com-
pressed mode frame timing (Step S611), a reduction of 

transmission rate and a reception timing are instructed 
to the deframing/de-spreading unit 24C (Step S612). 
[0103] Then, deinterleave across two frames is in-
structed to the deinterleaver 23 (Step S613), and the 
deinterleaver 23 deinterleaves across two frames. In this 
way, in the compressed mode, frames are received in-
termittently (non-continuously). 
[0104] As described above, according to the sixth ex-
ample, in addition to what has been described in the fifth 
example described above, in the compressed mode, bit 
units are interleaved across multiple frames, enabling an 
appropriate interleaving time to be' secured in the com-
pressed mode as in the normal mode. As a consequence, 
transmission errors caused by interleaving of bit units 
can be further reduced. 
[0105] Furthermore, in the sixth example, in the com-
pressed mode, a compressed frame may be divided into 
the front and rear of the same frame timing as in the 
normal mode, and transmitted intermittently in compli-
ance with that arrangement in the same manner as in 
the second example described above. Because of this 
fact, it is possible to secure an appropriate interleaving 
time in compressed mode in the same way as in the nor-
mal mode, with a simple interleaving constitution. As a 
result, poor performance caused by interleaving in bit 
units can be prevented. 
[0106] Furthermore, in the sixth example, in the com-
pressed mode, a compressed frame may be slotted and 
transmitted intermittently in N slot units in the same man-
ner as in the third example described above. Because of 
this fact, it is possible to receive transmission power con-
trol bits transmitted in the downlink in comparatively short 
time intervals. As a result, the amount of error in the trans-
mission power control can be reduced. 
[0107] In the above-mentioned examples 1 to 6, a func-
tion for preventing transmission deterioration in the com-
pressed mode was explained, but the present invention 
is not restricted to this, and it is acceptable to vary the 
amount of transmission power during transmission pow-
er control as in a seventh example described below. 
[0108] Firstly, the constitution of the CDMA system will 
be explained. FIG. 27 is a block diagram showing a CD-
MA system according to a seventh example of the 
present invention. The CDMA system comprises a trans-
mitter 1D and a receiver 2D. Such a CDMA system is 
provided with both the base station and mobile stations. 
The base station and the mobile stations carry out radio 
communication using a CDMA communication method. 
[0109] As shown in FIG. 27, the transmitter 1D com-
prises a controller 11D, an error-correction encoder 12, 
an interleaver 13, a framing/ spreading unit 14D, a radio 
frequency transmitter 15, etc. Through negotiations with 
the receiver 2D, the controller 11D mainly controls the 
operations of the interleaver 13, the framing/ spreading 
unit 14D, and the radio frequency transmitter 15. This 
controller 11D supplies compressed mode information 
such as transmission timings in compressed mode to the 
framing/ spreading unit 14D. Furthermore, this controller 

19 
20 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

12 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

11D instructs increase or decrease of the transmission 
power to the radio frequency transmitter 15, based on 
received power information and TPC bit information re-
ceived from the receiver 2D via an uplink. 
[0110] The error-correction encoder 12, the interleaver 
13, and the radio frequency transmitter 15 are the same 
as in the first example already described above, and ex-
planation thereof will be omitted. As regards the inter-
leaver 13, it has a memory for interleaving one frame. 
Furthermore, the radio frequency transmitter 15 increase 
or decreases the transmission power in accordance with 
the transmission power increase or decrease instruction 
of the controller 11D, and outputs the transmission sig-
nals. 
[0111] The framing/ spreading unit 14D is assigned op-
erations such as spreading the band in correspondence 
with the normal mode and compressed mode, using a 
spreading code for each user, forming a frame corre-
sponding to each mode, and, when the controller 11D 
has instructed a transmission timing in correspondence 
with each of the modes, sending the frame to the radio 
frequency transmitter 15 in accordance with that trans-
mission timing. 
[0112] As shown in FIG. 27, the receiver 2D comprises 
a controller 21D, an error-correction decoder 22, a dein-
terleaver 23, a deframing/de-spreading unit 24D, a radio 
frequency transmitter 25, etc. Through negotiations with 
the transmitter 1D, the controller 21D mainly controls the 
operations of the deinterleaver 23 and the deframing/de-
spreading unit 24D. In the compressed mode, this con-
troller 21D supplies compressed frame information, such 
as reception timings and the like for receiving com-
pressed mode frames, to the deframing/de-spreading 
unit 24D. 
[0113] The error-correction decoder 22, the deinter-
leaver 23, and the radio frequency transmitter 25 are the 
same as in the first example already described above, 
and explanation thereof will be omitted. Here, the dein-
terleaver 23 has a memory for interleaving one frame. 
Furthermore, when the radio frequency receiver 25 has 
received a reception signal, it notifies the controller 21D 
of information (information on reception power) showing 
the reception power. 
[0114] When the deframing/de-spreading unit 24D has 
received reception timings in correspondence with each 
of the modes from the controller 21D, it extracts the re-
ception signal from the radio frequency transmitter 25 in 
accordance with the reception timings. Furthermore, in 
the compressed mode, this deframing/de-spreading unit 
24D receives compressed frame information from the 
controller 21D and performs deframing and de-spread-
ing, and sequentially outputs the frames to the deinter-
leaver 23. Furthermore, the deframing/de-spreading unit 
24D detects TPC bits from the received signal, and no-
tifies the controller 21D of these. 
[0115] Next, the relationship between the TPC bits and 
the transmission power control amount will be explained. 
FIG. 28 is a diagram showing the relationship between 

transmission power control symbols and transmission 
power control amounts according to the seventh exam-
ple. The table shown in FIG. 28 is held by the controller 
11D of the transmitter 1D and also the controller 21D of 
the receiver 2D. The TPC bit is the transmission power 
control symbol, and since it comprises one bit, it has two 
states: 1 (ON) and 0 (OFF). In the normal mode, a trans-
mission power control amount of +1.0 dB (decibel) is ap-
plied in the 1 (ON) state and a transmission power control 
amount of -1.0 dB is applied in the 0 (OFF) state. That 
is, the unit of transmission power control in the normal 
mode is 1 dB. 
[0116] On the other hand, in the compressed mode, a 
transmission power control amount of +3.0 dB (decibels) 
is applied in the 1 (ON) state, and a transmission power 
control amount of -3.0 dB is applied in the 0 (OFF) state. 
That is, the unit of transmission power control in the nor-
mal mode is 3 dB. The transmission power control unit 
used in the compressed mode has a greater absolute 
value than that used in the normal mode, for the reason 
that idle period (non-transmission timing) in the com-
pressed mode lowers the adhesion capability to the 
transmission power control. 
[0117] Next, the operation will be explained. The sev-
enth example differs from the other examples in respect 
of its transmission power control function, and therefore 
only the transmission power control will be explained. 
FIG. 29 is a flowchart explaining the transmission power 
control operation in compressed mode according to the 
seventh example. Transmission power control of the 
transmitter 1D and the receiver 2D explained here is the 
transmission power control to an uplink. 
[0118] A TPC bit from the receiver 2D and reception 
power information on the receiver 2D side are sent to the 
transmitter 1D. In the transmitter 1D, when the TPC bit 
and the reception power information are received (Step 
S701), transmission power increase/ decrease informa-
tion is determined based on this received information 
(Step S702). Then, transmission from the radio frequen-
cy transmitter 15 is controlled at that determined trans-
mission power (Step S703). 
[0119] More specifically, for instance, when there is 
one TPC bit, an instruction is made to increase the trans-
mission power, and consequently the transmission pow-
er control of +3 dB from the table of FIG. 28 is set. There-
fore, an instruction to transmit after raising the present 
transmission power by 3 dB is sent to the radio frequency 
transmitter 15. On the other hand, when the TPC bit is 
0, an instruction is given to decrease the transmission 
power, by setting the transmission power control of -3 dB 
from the table of FIG. 28. Therefore, an instruction to 
transmit after decreasing the present transmission power 
by 3 dB is sent to the radio frequency transmitter 15. 
[0120] As described above, according to the seventh 
example, in the compressed mode, transmission power 
is controlled so that the transmission power control unit 
for one transmission is greater than in the normal mode, 
and consequently, even when the temporal intervals of 

21 
22 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

13 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

the transmission power control during intermittent trans-
mission are wider, it is possible to widen the control range 
of the transmission power and maintain adhesion to the 
transmission power in the compressed mode. As a con-
sequence, the amount of error of transmission power 
control in the compressed mode can be reduced. 
[0121] Furthermore, in the seventh example, in the 
compressed mode, a compressed frame may be slotted 
and transmitted intermittently in N slot units in the same 
manner as in the third example described above. Con-
sequently, it is possible to transmit transmission power 
control bits in the downlink in comparatively short time 
intervals. As a result, the amount of error in the transmis-
sion power control can be reduced. 
[0122] In the above-mentioned seventh example, the 
TPC bit states were limited to two types of increase and 
decrease, but the present invention is not restricted to 
this, and it is acceptable to vary the amount of transmis-
sion power control for each mode, as in an eighth exam-
ple explained below. The eighth example has the same 
overall constitution as the seventh example described 
above, and so only the differing aspects of the operation 
will be explained below. In the following explanation, the 
reference numerals of FIG. 27 will be used. 
[0123] Firstly, the relationship between the TPC bits 
and the transmission power control amount will be ex-
plained. FIG. 30 is a diagram showing the relationship 
between transmission power control symbols and trans-
mission power control amounts according to the eighth 
example. The table shown in FIG. 30 is held by the con-
troller 11D of the transmitter 1D and also the controller 
21D of the receiver 2D. 
[0124] In the eighth example, the TPC bit is the trans-
mission power control symbol, and there are two bits. 
Therefore, there are four types of states: (11B (B repre-
sents a binary number), 10B, 01B, and 00B). The two 
TPC bit states 11B and 10B represent an increase of 
transmission power, and the two TPC bit states 01B and 
00B represent a decrease of transmission power. 
[0125] In the normal mode, as in the seventh example 
described above, there are only two types of states, ON 
and OFF. However, since two TPC bits are used, ON is 
11B and OFF is 00B. When the TPC bits are 11B the 
transmission power control amount is +1 dB, and when 
they are 00B the transmission power control amount is 
-1 dB. Similarly, in the compressed mode, as in the sev-
enth example described above, when the TPC bits are 
11B the transmission power control amount is increased 
by three times the transmission power control amount in 
the normal mode, namely +3 dB. When the TPC bits are 
00B the transmission power control amount is increased 
by three times of the transmission power control amount 
in the normal mode, namely -3 dB. In the eighth example, 
four types of variation are applied to the transmission 
power control amount in the compressed mode, so that 
when the TPC bits are 10B the transmission power con-
trol amount is +1 dB, and when they are 01B the trans-
mission power control amount is -1 dB. 

[0126] In the normal mode, when the TPC bits are in 
the 11B state, a transmission power control amount of 
+1.0 dB (decibels) is applied, and in the 00B state, a 
transmission power control amount of -1.0 dB is applied. 
That is, the unit of transmission power control in the nor-
mal mode is 1 dB. In the normal mode, there are no stip-
ulations concerning the state 10B and the state 01B, and 
the transmission power remains in its current state during 
this mode. 
[0127] On the other hand, in the compressed mode, 
when the TPC bits are 11B, a transmission power control 
amount of +3.0 dB (decibels) is applied, and when the 
TPC bits are 00B, a transmission power control amount 
of -3.0 dB is applied. That is, when the TPC bits are at 
11B or 00B, the unit of transmission power control in the 
normal mode is 3 dB. 
[0128] Furthermore, in the compressed mode, when 
the TPC bits are 10B, a transmission power control 
amount of +1.0 dB (decibel) is applied, and when the 
TPC bits are 01B, a transmission power control amount 
of -1.0 dB is applied. That is, when the TPC bits are at 
10B or 01B, the unit of transmission power control in the 
compressed mode is 1 dB. 
[0129] Thus, the transmission power control unit is var-
ied in the compressed mode in order to improve the ad-
hesion capability of the transmission power control, mak-
ing it possible to appropriately accommodate changes in 
the idle period (non-transmission timing) in the com-
pressed mode. 
[0130] Next, the operation will be explained. The eighth 
example differs from the other examples in respect of its 
transmission power control function, and therefore only 
the transmission power control will be explained. FIG. 31 
is a flowchart explaining the transmission power control 
operation in compressed mode according to the eighth 
example. Transmission power control of the transmitter 
1D and the receiver 2D explained here is the transmission 
power control to an uplink. 
[0131] A TPC bit from the receiver 2D and reception 
power information on the receiver 2D side are sent to the 
transmitter 1D. When the transmitter 1D receives the 
TPC bit and the reception power information (Step S801) 
it determines the value of the TPC bits (Step S802). Then, 
the table of FIG. 30 is consulted, and a desired transmis-
sion power increase/ decrease information is set, based 
on the determination in the Step S802 (Step S803). Then, 
transmission to the radio frequency transmitter 15 is con-
trolled at the set transmission power (Step S804). 
[0132] More specifically, for instance, when the TPC 
bits are 11B, an instruction is made to increase the trans-
mission power, and the transmission power control of +3 
dB from the above-mentioned table of FIG. 30 is set. 
Therefore, an instruction to transmit after raising the 
present transmission power by 3 dB is sent to the radio 
frequency transmitter 15. On the other hand, when the 
TPC bits are' 00B, an instruction is given to decrease the 
transmission power, by setting the transmission power 
control of -3 dB from the table of the above-mentioned 

23 
24 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

14 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

FIG. 30. Therefore, an instruction to transmit after de-
creasing the present transmission power by 3 dB is sent 
to the radio frequency transmitter 15. 
[0133] Furthermore, when the TPC bits are 10B, an 
instruction is made to increase the transmission power, 
and the transmission power control of +1 dB from the 
above-mentioned table of FIG. 30 is set. Therefore, an 
instruction to transmit after raising the present transmis-
sion power by 1 dB is sent to the radio frequency trans-
mitter 15. On the other hand, when the TPC bits are 01B, 
an instruction is given to decrease the transmission pow-
er, by setting the transmission power control of -1 dB 
from the table of the above-mentioned FIG. 30. There-
fore, an instruction to transmit after decreasing the 
present transmission power by 1 dB is sent to the radio 
frequency transmitter 15. 
[0134] As described above, according to the eighth ex-
ample, transmission power is controlled in compliance 
with transmission power control units in correspondence 
with the normal mode and the compressed mode, and in 
addition, in correspondence with the temporal intervals 
of the transmission power control in the compressed 
mode. Therefore, in the compressed mode, even when 
the temporal intervals of the transmission power control 
fluctuate and become long during intermittent transmis-
sion, it is possible to use an appropriate transmission 
power control range, and thereby maintain adhesion to 
the transmission power. As a consequence, the amount 
of error of transmission power control in the compressed 
mode can be reduced. 
[0135] The number of TPC bits and the transmission 
power is greater than the seventh example described 
above. However, transmission power is in any case 
greater in compressed mode so that the needed trans-
mission power of the TPC bit is attained by that greater 
power. Consequently, there is a merit that the transmis-
sion error rate has almost no effect on the control per-
formance. 
[0136] Furthermore, in the eighth example, in the com-
pressed mode, a compressed frame may be slotted and 
transmitted intermittently in N slot units in the same man-
ner as in the third example described above. Conse-
quently, it is possible to receive transmission power con-
trol bits transmitted in the downlink in comparatively short 
time intervals. As a result, the amount of error in the trans-
mission power control can be reduced. 
[0137] In the examples 1 to 8 explained above, the 
transmission format in the compressed mode has a con-
stitution for maintaining interleaving performance and 
transmission power control precision, but the present in-
vention is not restricted to this, and it is acceptable to set 
the transmission format in consideration of reducing the 
number of spreading codes used, as in the following ninth 
example. 
[0138] Firstly, the constitution of a base station in which 
the CDMA system of a ninth example of the present in-
vention has been applied will be explained. The consti-
tution of the mobile stations will be not explained here. 

FIG. 32 is a block diagram showing an example consti-
tution of a base station according to the ninth example 
of the present invention. As shown in FIG. 32, this base 
station comprises a transmitter group 100, an adder 110, 
a radio frequency transmitter 120, a compressed mode 
controller 200 which is connected to the transmitter group 
100 and controls transmission in the compressed mode, 
etc. Radio communication between the base station and 
mobile stations not shown in the diagram are performed 
using the CDMA communication method. 
[0139] The transmitter group 100 comprises multiple 
transmitters #1 to #M (where M is a natural number) for 
creating transmission data separately for users in corre-
spondence with a serviceable number of users. Each of 
the transmitters #1 to #M has the same constitution. The 
constitution will be explained taking the transmitter #1 as 
an example. As shown in FIG. 32, the transmitter #1 com-
prises a controller 11E, the error-correction encoder 12, 
the interleaver 13, a framing/ spreading unit 14E, a trans-
mission power control amplifier 16, etc. 
[0140] Through negotiations with the compressed 
mode controller 200, the controller 11E mainly controls 
the operations' of the interleaver 13, the framing/ spread-
ing unit 14E, and the transmission power control amplifier 
16. In the compressed mode, the controller 11E supplies 
transmission timings for transmitting compressed mode 
frames, and spreading codes having a lower spreading 
factor than those normally used for transmitting com-
pressed mode frames, to the framing/ spreading unit 14E. 
[0141] The error-correction encoder 12 and the inter-
leaver 13 are the same as in the first example already 
described above, and explanation thereof will be omitted. 
As regards the interleaver 13, it has a memory for inter-
leaving one frame. 
[0142] The framing/ spreading unit 14E spreads the 
band using spreading codes of different spreading fac-
tors in correspondence with the normal mode and the 
compressed mode, and forms a frame for each mode. 
When the controller 11E has instructed transmission tim-
ings in correspondence with each of the modes, the fram-
ing/ spreading unit 14E sends the frames to the transmis-
sion power control amplifier 16 in accordance with the 
transmission timing. Furthermore, in the compressed 
mode, this framing/ spreading unit 14E receives an in-
struction from the controller 11E to lower the spreading 
factor, and in accordance with that' instruction it obtains 
a transmission signal using a lower spreading factor than 
in the normal mode. 
[0143] In compliance with the control of the controller 
11E, the transmission power control amplifier 16 ampli-
fies the average transmission power of the transmission 
signal, obtained by the framing/ spreading unit 14E, in the 
compressed mode as compared with the normal mode, 
and outputs the transmission signal. The transmitters #1 
to #M independently determine whether or not to use 
compressed mode transmission, and furthermore, since 
the ratio of compression in the compressed mode is set 
independently by the individual transmitters #1 to #M, 

25 
26 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

15 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

transmission power control amplifiers 16 are provided 
independently to the individual transmitters #1 to #M. 
[0144] The adder 110 adds the transmission signals 
outputted from the transmitters #1 to #M comprising the 
transmitter group 100, and sends them to the radio fre-
quency transmitter 120 provided in the latter-stage. The 
radio frequency transmitter 120 converts the signal out-
put obtained by the adder 110 to a radio frequency, and 
transmits it. One radio frequency transmitter 120 is pro-
vided in each base station. 
[0145] As shown in FIG. 32, the compressed mode 
controller 200 comprises a compressed mode manager 
201, a frame combination controller 202, a spreading 
code allocation controller 203, a transmission timing con-
troller 204, etc. The compressed mode manager 201 
manages the compressed mode of each transmitter in 
the transmitter group 100, and inputs/ outputs control data 
for to the compressed mode. 
[0146] The frame combination controller 202 receives 
transmission period information about compressed 
mode frames of transmitters performing compressed 
mode transmission from the compressed mode manager 
201. In compliance with that transmission period infor-
mation, the frame combination controller 202 searches 
among the multiple compressed mode frames for a com-
bination of frames having a total transmission timing 
which is within one frame duration. 
[0147] The spreading code allocation controller 203 al-
locates a spreading code, to be used for spreading a 
compressed mode frame, to transmitters transmitting in 
the compressed mode. The transmission timing control-
ler 204 controls the timings at which compressed mode 
frames are to be transmitted in the compressed mode. 
[0148] Next, frame transmission including com-
pressed mode will be explained. FIG. 33 is a diagram 
explaining frame transmission of a downlink according 
to the ninth example. In FIG. 33, the vertical axis repre-
sents transmission rate/ transmission power, and the hor-
izontal axis represents time. In the CDMA system, during 
normal transmission, a period of time is provided to slot 
the frame and transmit it intermittently, and the strength 
of the other frequency carriers is measured using the fact 
that the frames are not transmitted (idle period) during 
that period. 
[0149] For that purpose, the slotted frame must be 
compressed, and in a conventional method, the spread-
ing factor is decreased when transmitting the com-
pressed frame. In this case, a smaller number of spread-
ing codes having a lower spreading factor must be allo-
cated to each user carrying out compressed mode trans-
mission, consuming valuable spreading code resources. 
[0150] Accordingly, as shown in FIG. 33, for instance 
during compressed mode transmission between the 
base station of FIG. 32 and mobile stations M1 and M2, 
a group of compressed mode frames is collected from 
among the compressed mode frames created by multiple 
users in such a way that the collected group has a total 
transmission period of less than one frame duration. The 

same spreading code having a low spreading factor is 
allocated to each frame in the group, and they are trans-
mitted at times which do not overlap within one frame 
duration, thereby enabling multiple mobile station to 
share one spreading code. That is, in the downlink for 
the mobile stations M1 and M2, different spreading codes 
A and B are fixedly allocated to the mobile stations M1 
and M2 during the normal mode (normal transmission). 
[0151] On the contrary, in the compressed mode (slot-
ted transmission), an identical spreading code C is allo-
cated to both of the mobile stations M1 and M2, and the 
compressed mode frame transmission timings of the mo-
bile stations M1 and M2 are controlled so that their trans-
mission timings which both use the spreading code C do 
not overlap, enabling the compressed mode frame of 
each to be transmitted during the idle period T2 or T1 of 
the other. 
[0152] Next, the operation will be explained. Firstly, 
the operation of the framing/ spreading unit 14E during 
the compressed mode in the transmitters #1 to #M will 
be explained. FIG. 34 is a flowchart explaining the trans-
mission operation in the compressed mode according to 
the ninth example of the present invention. The execution 
of the operation of FIG. 34 is controlled by the controller 
11E although the individual operations are performed by 
various sections. In the compressed mode, interleaving 
in one frame is instructed to the interleaver 13 (Step 
5901), and the interleaver 13 interleaves one frame. 
Then, information relating to the compressed mode 
frame is output to the compressed mode controller 200 
(step S902). 
[0153] Then, a negotiation is carried out with the com-
pressed mode controller 200, and a spreading factor 
(spreading code) instruction of the compressed mode 
controller 200 and a compressed mode frame transmis-
sion timing are supplied to the framing/ spreading, unit 
14E (Step S903). Moreover, the transmission power con-
trol amplifier 16 is instructed to increase the average 
transmission power (Step S904), and the compressed 
mode frame is transmitted at a high transmission power. 
In this way, frames are transmitted intermittently (non-
continuously) in the compressed mode. 
[0154] Next, the control operation in compressed 
mode of the compressed mode controller 200 will be ex-
plained. FIG. 35 is a flowchart explaining the compressed 
mode control operation according to the ninth example. 
The operation of FIG. 35 is controlled by the compressed 
mode manager 201 although the individual operations 
are performed by various sections in the compressed 
mode controller 200. In FIG. 35, information relating to 
compressed mode is gathered through communication 
between the transmitters #1 to #M. 
[0155] Accordingly, the channels are checked to de-
termine whether they are in the compressed mode (Step 
S911). Then, when it has been confirmed that there are 
multiple channels in the compressed mode (Step S912), 
the transmission period of the compressed mode frame 
in each channel in compressed mode is checked (Step 

27 
28 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

16 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

S913). On the other hand, if there are no multiple chan-
nels in the compressed mode in the Step' S912, the 
processing returns to the Step S911. 
[0156] When checking the transmission-period in the 
Step S913, the transmission periods of the compressed 
mode frames extracted from each channel in the com-
pressed mode are calculated together in a given combi-
nation to form one transmission duration. Then, it is de-
termined whether the total times of the combinations in-
clude any combinations which can fit into one frame du-
ration (Step S914). 
[0157] As a result, when there is a combination which 
can fit into one frame duration, that combination is used 
for compressed mode frame transmission by allocating 
a single spreading code and mutually differing transmis-
sion timings to the channels (transmitters) of the com-
pressed mode frames included in the combination (Step 
S915). On the' other hand, if there are no combinations 
which can fit into one frame duration, multiple channels 
cannot be transmitted with a single spreading code, and 
so the processing returns to the Step. S911. 
[0158] As described above, according to the ninth ex-
ample, in the compressed mode controller 200, a com-
bination is extracted from given combinations of multiple 
compressed mode frames compressed by separate us-
ers in the transmitter group 100, the extracted combina-
tion having a total transmission timing of less than one 
frame duration, the same spreading code is allocated to 
each of multiple channels which transmit the extracted 
combination, and the transmission timings of the com-
pressed mode frames which comprise the above extract-
ed combinations are controlled in such a manner that 
they do not temporally overlap within one frame duration, 
while using the same spreading code. As a consequence, 
when there are multiple compressed mode frames, it is 
possible to reduce the number of spreading codes having 
low spreading factors used in the compressed mode. As 
a result; spreading code resources can be effectively 
used in the compressed mode. 
[0159] Furthermore, in the ninth example, in the com-
pressed mode, a compressed frame may be divided into 
the front and rear of the same frame timing as in the 
normal mode, and transmitted intermittently in compli-
ance with that arrangement in the same manner as in 
the second example described above. Consequently, it 
is possible to secure an appropriate interleaving time in 
compressed mode in the same way as in the normal 
mode, with a simple interleave constitution. As a result, 
poor performance caused by interleaving in bit units can 
be prevented. 
[0160] Furthermore, in the ninth example, in the com-
pressed mode, a compressed frame may be slotted and 
transmitted intermittently in N slot units in the same man-
ner as in the third example described above. Conse-
quently, it is possible to receive transmission power con-
trol bits transmitted in the downlink in comparatively short 
time intervals. As a result, the amount of error in the trans-
mission power control can be reduced. 

[0161] In the above explanation, only a sample of an 
example combination of the characteristic parts of the 
examples 1 to 9 was shown, and other combinations 
thereof can of course be realized. 
[0162] The examples 1 to 9 of the present invention 
were explained above, but various modifications are pos-
sible within the range of the main points of the present 
invention, and these are not excluded from the range of 
the invention. 
[0163] The examples 1 to 9 described above explain 
how a period of time is provided to slot the frame and 
transmit it intermittently, and the strength of other fre-
quency carriers is measured using non-transmission 
time, i.e. idle period, during that period. However, the 
method of establishing synchronization between the mo-
bile stations and the base station in an actual handover 
between different frequencies was not mentioned. 
Therefore, a communication device capable of realizing 
handovers between different frequencies using the in-
vention, and a method of establishing synchronization 
thereof, will be explained below. 
[0164] Firstly, before describing a handover between 
different frequencies, the constitution of information 
transmitted and received between the mobile stations 
and the base station will be explained. 
[0165] FIG. 37 shows a frame constitution of a broad-
cast channel (BCH). In a W-CDMA system, as shown in 
FIG. 37 (a), one frame of the broadcast channel compris-
es sixteen slots, for instance, corresponding to #1 to #16 
in the diagram. Furthermore, as shown in FIG. 37 (b), 
one slot comprises ten symbols (representing one cycle 
of the spreading code). In this constitution, the four sym-
bols shown by "P" in the diagram are pilot symbols need-
ed for detecting phase information, the five symbols 
shown by "D1 to D5" in the diagram are information com-
ponents of the broadcast channel, and one symbol 
shown by "FSC" (first search code) and "SSC" (second 
search code) in the diagram is a search code. The first 
search code and the second search code are transmitted 
at the same time. 
[0166] Furthermore, in the W-CDMA system, spec-
trum spreading is performed using spreading codes, the 
spreading codes comprising two elements called a 
spreading code (short code) specific to the channels, and 
a scrambling code (long code) specific to the base sta-
tions (see FIG. 37 (c).and FIG. 37 (d)). The same speed-
ing code is used for the pilot symbol P and the information 
components D1 to D5, and different spreading codes 
(COMMON and C+Walsh in the diagram) are used for 
the search codes. Furthermore, only the search code is 
not spread by the scrambling code. Next, the normal 
mode sequence of establishing synchronization between 
the base station and the mobile stations in the W-CDMA 
system will be explained keeping in mind the basic as-
sumption (constitution of the broadcast channel frame) 
mentioned above. 
[0167] In a W-CDMA system, the cells are basically 
unsynchronized, that is, the frame timings and the like 

29 
30 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

17 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

do not generally match. Accordingly, in the W-CDMA sys-
tem, the mobile stations and the base stations can be 
synchronized using, for instance, a three-stage initial ac-
quisition method. 
[0168] In the first stage, a first search code (FSC), be-
ing transmitted commonly from all the base stations and 
time-continually, is detected. Using this, slot synchroni-
zation can be established. 
[0169] In the second stage, multiple second search 
codes (SSC), transmitted at the same timing as the first 
search code, are detected continuously in sixteen slots, 
and determined in their transmission sequence. As a con-
sequence, frame synchronisation can be established, 
and' moreover, a scrambling code group number can be 
identified. More specifically, for instance, as shown in 
FIG. 38, the second search codes are detected in sixteen 
continuous slots. Then, frame synchronization can be 
accomplished from one cycle comprising #1 to #16 from 
the second search codes detected in this manner. More-
over, the scrambling code group number can.be identi-
fied based for instance on a correspondence table such 
as that shown in FIG. 39. Here, the slot # on the horizontal 
axis represent slot numbers, and the groups on the ver-
tical axis represent scrambling code groups. Further-
more, there are seventeen types of second search codes 
(1 to 17), and from a combination of sixteen slots it is 
possible to uniformly identify the scrambling code group 
number, i.e. the scrambling code used by the base station 
which the mobile station belongs to. The numeric values 
of the second search codes stored in this table are one 
specific example to explain the present invention, and in 
the sense of identifying a given numeric pattern, other 
numeric values can of course be used. 
[0170] In the third stage, it is identified which of the 
multiple scrambling codes contained in the scrambling 
group numbers are being used, to complete the estab-
lishment of -synchronization-of the downstream line of 
the corresponding base station. 
[0171] FIG. 40 is a flowchart of a case when the syn-
chronization establishment sequence described above 
is actually being performed on the mobile station side. 
Below, the operation of the mobile station will be ex-
plained based on FIG. 37. 
[0172] Firstly, the mobile station performs processing 
corresponding to the first stage, by detecting the first 
search code (Step S921). Detection is carried out con-
tinuously until a first search code is detected (Step 
S922) . 
[0173] When the first search code has been detected 
(YES in the Step S922), the mobile station synchronizes 
the slots, and then detects sixteen second search codes 
in the second stage (Step S923). Here, at the mobile 
station, when a second search code cannot be detected 
due to the condition of the channels or the like (NO in 
Step 924), the number of undetected places is counted 
(Step S925), and it is determined whether there are more 
or less of these than a predetermined number set in ad-
vance (Step S926). For instance, when there are more 

of them, the second search code is detected again (Step 
S923), and on the other hand, when there are fewer of 
them, only that portion is detected. (Step S927 and Step 
928). 
[0174] In this way, when all the second search codes 
have been detected (YES in the Step S924, and YES in 
the Step 928), as explained above, the mobile station 
establishes frame synchronization, and identifies the 
scrambling code group number. 
[0175] Finally, as the third stage, the mobile station 
identifies the scrambling code used by the corresponding 
base station (Step 931, YES in Step 932), completing 
the establishment of initial synchronization. Thus com-
munication becomes possible. When calculating the cor-
relation value of the identified scrambling codes (Step 
S933), when all the codes are below a predetermined 
reference value (YES in Step 934), the second search 
codes are detected again (Step S923); otherwise (NO in 
the Step S934), the scrambling codes are reidentified 
until the Step 931 is completed. 
[0176] On the other hand, as explained earlier (in a 
case requiring a handover as explained in the conven-
tional technology), when performing a handover between 
different frequencies, the power of other carriers is meas-
ured in compliance with an order from the base station 
or a determination carried out by the mobile station, and 
if there is a carrier which seems actually capable of a 
frequency handover, the handover is carried out accord-
ing to a predetermined sequence. At that point, a first 
search code can be detected without fail, i.e., at least 
once in the idle period described in the above examples 
1 to 9. However, to detect a second search code it is 
necessary to search one frame, i.e. all sixteen slots, and 
consequently it cannot be detected in this way. There-
fore, similarly, it is not possible to detect the scrambling 
code group number. 
[0177] Accordingly, it is an object of the present exam-
ple to realize a communication device capable of detect-
ing all second search codes by gradually shifting the idle 
period of not more than half of one frame. 
[0178] FIG. 41 shows a constitution of a receiver ac-
cording to a tenth example of the present invention. This 
constitution is provided to the mobile stations. 
[0179] As shown in FIG. 41, the receiver 2E comprises 
a controller 21E, an error-correction decoder 22, a dein-
terleaver 23, a deframing/de-spreading unit 24E, a radio 
frequency transmitter 25, a time/de-spreading unit 51, a 
detecting/ determining unit 52, and a switch 53. Parts of 
the constitution which are the same as the examples al-
ready described are represented by the same reference 
codes and explanation thereof will be omitted. 
[0180] Through negotiations with a transmitter not 
shown in the diagram, the controller 21E mainly controls 
the operations of the deinterleaver 23, the deframing/de-
spreading unit 24E, and the switch 53. By negotiating 
with the transmitter, this controller 21E indicates frame 
numbers of the frames to be deinterleaved, appropriate 
to the normal mode and the compressed mode. Further-

31 
32 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

18 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

more, in the compressed mode, this controller 21E sup-
plies an instruction to reduce the spreading factor, and 
reception timings for receiving compressed mode 
frames, to the switch 53, the deframing/de-spreading unit 
2E, and the time/de-spreading unit 51. That is, the switch 
53 and the time/de-spreading unit 51 are connected only 
in the idle period. 
[0181] The radio frequency receiver 25 decodes re-
ceived signals sent from an antenna not shown in the 
diagram. The deframing/de-spreading unit 24E de-
spreads using spreading codes allocated to the users of 
the receiver 2E in correspondence with the normal mode 
and the compressed mode, and forms a frame for each 
mode. When the controller 21E has instructed the de-
framing/de-spreading unit 24 E of reception timings in 
correspondence with each of the modes, the deframi-
hg/de-spreading unit 24E extracts the received signals 
from the radio frequency receiver 25 in accordance with 
the reception timings. Furthermore, in the.compressed 
mode, the deframing/de-spreading unit 24E receives an 
instruction from the controller 21E to reduce the spread-
ing factor, and, in accordance with that instruction, ob-
tains a received signal using a lower spreading factor 
than in the normal mode. The deinterleaver 23 chrono-
logically interleaves (deinterleaves) the coded data in bit 
units, in a reverse sequence to the interleaving in the 
transmitter. The error-correction decoder 22 corrects er-
rors in the deinterleaved signal to obtain decoded data, 
i.e. a received data stream. 
[0182] Furthermore, during the idle period, the 
time/de-spreading unit 51 detects first search codes and 
second search codes on other carriers. The detecting/ 
determining unit 52 carries out a determining process, 
described later, based on the detected first search codes 
and second search codes. 
[0183] The receiver 2E having the constitution as 
shown in FIG. 42 normally receives a compressed frame 
on a carrier (frequency: f1) being used' in communication. 
In idle period this receiver 2E receives the search code 
on another carrier (frequency: f2). 
[0184] Next, the operation in the receiver 2E when per-
forming a handover will be explained. FIG. 43 is a flow-
chart of the procedures of establishing synchronization 
performed on the mobile station side during a handover 
between W-CDMA/W-CDMA different frequencies. In 
the handover explained below, the controller 21E carries 
out control based on a determination of the detecting/ 
determining unit 52. 
[0185] For instance, in the case of a handover per-
formed in accordance with a command from the base 
station or a determination of the mobile station, the mobile 
station extracts cell information of other frequency carri-
ers from the base station (Step S941). 
[0186] Next, based on the extracted information, the 
mobile station carries out processing corresponding to 
the first stage by detecting a first search code and a dif-
ferent frequency carrier during the idle period of the com-
pressed mode (Step 5942). Basically, this detecting is 

performed continuously until the first search code is de-
tected (Step S943), but returns to redetecting the cell 
information and the first search code in accordance with 
a setting of the receiver (Step S944). During the idle pe-
riod, the switch 53 is connected to the timing/de-spread-
ing unit 51 in compliance with the controller 21E. 
[0187] When the first search code and the different fre-
quency carrier have been detected (YES in the Step 
S943), the mobile station establishes slot synchroniza-
tion, and then detects sixteen second search codes in 
the second stage (Step S945). As the second search 
code detection, as for instance shown in FIG. 44, the 
controller 21E shifts the idle period for each slot, and 
detects one second search code in each frame. That is, 
all the second search codes are detected in sixteen 
frames. 
[0188] Furthermore, the method of detecting the sec-
ond search code is not restricted to this, and two second 
search codes may be detected in one frame, as for in-
stance shown in FIG. 45. This case differs form FIG. 44 
in that all the second search codes can be detected in 
eight frames. Furthermore, when continuously control-
ling multiple frames (two frames are shown in the dia-
gram), as for instance shown in FIG. 46 and FIG. 47, all 
the second search codes can be detected by setting the 
idle period. As explained above, the idle period needs 
only to be set to a maximum of half the duration of one 
frame, there being many conceivable variations other 
than the above. Therefore, the number of frames detect-
ed varies according to the length of the idle period. Fur-
thermore, detection reliability can be improved by detect-
ing all the second search codes a number of times. 
[0189] However, when the idle period is set long, al-
though the detection time does not take longer than when 
the idle period is short, there may be some deterioration 
in the quality of information data that was being transmit-
ted, or interference power may be increased if the trans-
mission power is increased to maintain the quality of this 
data. On the other hand, when the idle period is short-
ened, although there is not as much deterioration in the 
quality of information data as compared to when the idle 
period is long, the detection time is much longer. Accord-
ingly, an optimum idle period must be set at the receiver 
side, with consideration to synthesizer performance (syn-
thesizer switching time and the like) and the channel con-
dition and the like. Furthermore, the portions in the frames 
of FIG. 45 to FIG. 47 where the slots overlap must be set 
as appropriate in accordance with synthesizer perform-
ance (synthesizer switching time and the like). 
[0190] In the Step S945, when the mobile station is 
unable to detect a second search code due to the con-
dition of the channel (NO in Step S924), the number of 
undetected places is counted (Step S925.), and it is de-
termined whether there are more or fewer than a prede-
termined number (Step S926); for instance, when there 
are more, the second search codes are detected again, 
on the other hand, when there are fewer, detecting is 
carried out in that portion only. 

33 
34 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

19 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

[0191] In this way, when all the second search codes 
have been detected (YES in the Step S924, or YES in 
the Step 928), the mobile station establishes frame syn-
chronization to the other carrier, and identifies the scram-
bling code group number of the corresponding base sta-
tion. 
[0192] Finally, as the third stage, the mobile station 
identifies the scrambling code used by the corresponding 
base station (Step 931, YES in Step 932), completing 
the establishment of initial synchronization in the hando-
ver. Thus communication is possible. When calculating 
the correlation value of the identified scrambling codes 
(Step S933), when all the codes are below a predeter-
mined reference value (YES in Step 934), the second 
search codes are detected again (Step S923); otherwise 
(NO in the Step S934), the scrambling codes are reiden-
tified until the Step 931 is completed. 
[0193] Next, a handover operation with another com-
munication system known as GSM (Global System for 
Mobile Communication) will be explained using the dia-
grams. This handover is also performed at the receiver 
2E shown in FIG. 41. Therefore, in this case, instead of 
the first search codes and the second search codes, the 
time/de-spreader 51 detects FCCH and SCH explained 
below. 
[0194] FIG. 48 is a diagram showing a constitution of 
a GSM superframe. FIG. 48 (a) is a GSM control channel, 
that is, a channel showing control information such as a 
Frequency Correction CH (FCCH) for tuning frequencies, 
a Synchronization CH (SCH) for synchronizing, as well 
as other information. FIG. 48 (b) shows a GSM Traffic 
CH (TCH). Furthermore, FIG. 49 is a flowchart in a case 
when a mobile station establishes synchronization in a 
handover between W-CDMA and GSM. 
[0195] Firstly, as a first stage, the W-CDMA mobile sta-
tion must discover where the GSM frequency carrier is, 
and so repeatedly coarsely measures power until it finds 
the carrier (Step S951 and Step S952). 
[0196] Next, when the mobile station has finished pow-
er measurement, as a second stage, based on the meas-
urement result, it finely adjusts the carrier frequency, 
measured by capturing the FCCH, and identifies the 
GSM carrier (Step S953). In the GSM, one superframe 
comprises fifty-one frames, including five FCCH. There-
fore, the W-CDMA system mobile station tunes the fre-
quency in these five periods (Step S954 and Step S955). 
Furthermore, the FCCH can be detected without shifting 
the idle period, by utilizing the fixed time difference be-
tween the FCCH/SCH superframe synchronization and 
the superframe synchronization in the W-CDMA system. 
However, the FCCH can be detected by gradually shifting 
the idle period, in the same way as in the above-men-
tioned handover between W-CDMA systems. 
[0197] Finally, when the GSM carrier has been identi-
fied, as a third stage, the mobile station capture the SCH, 
which is the frame next to the FCCH, and synchronizes 
the bit timings (Step S956, Step S957, and Step S958). 
For instance, if the detection of the FCCH is complete, 

the position of the SCH is already known (it is the next 
frame) and thus it can easily be detected. Therefore, al-
though it is necessary to identify all the superframes to 
detect the FCCH, the SCH can be detected merely by 
setting the idle period so that the frame next to the FCCH 
can be detected. However, when detecting the SCH, 
there is no need to capture the SCH immediately after 
the captured FCCH; for instance, the SCH immediately 
after the next FCCH can be captured, or any SCH can 
be captured. As a consequence, the W-CDMA system 
mobile station completes the establishment of initial syn-
chronization in the handover, enabling communication 
with the GSM to be carried out. 
[0198] In this way, according to the present example, 
a handover can easily be achieved between different fre-
quencies (between a W-CDMA system and a W-CDMA 
system, and between a W-CDMA system and a GSM). 
[0199] The above examples 1 to 10 describes in detail 
the spread spectrum communication device of the 
present invention, and the operations of these examples 
share the process of using an interleaver to chronologi-
cally interleave in bit units coded data, and thereafter, 
using a framing/ spreading unit to compress the inter-
leaved data. However, the interleaving of data does not 
necessarily have to be performed prior to compression, 
and can basically be performed in any point. For instance, 
the interleaving may be performed after the data has 
been compressed. Therefore, when interleaving after the 
data has been compressed, the error-correction encoder 
has the function of compressing the data, and there is 
no need for provide a framing/ spreading unit. In such a 
case, the constitution of the receiver side naturally chang-
es. That is, the deinterleave processing is performed first. 

INDUSTRIAL APPLICABILITY 

[0200] As above, the spread spectrum communication 
device according to the present invention is useful for a 
code division multiple access (CDMA) communication 
system, and is especially applicable to spread spectrum 
communication carrying out interleaving transmission 
and transmission power control, and moreover, is appli-
cable as a communication device for carrying out a 
handover between different frequencies (between a W-
CDMA system and a W-CDMA system, and between a 
W-CDMA system and a GSM). 

Claims 

1. A communication method applied to a mobile com-
munication system in a code division multiple access 
system for continuously transmitting frames in a nor-
mal mode and intermittently transmitting com-
pressed frames in a compressed mode, in accord-
ance with transmission power being controlled with 
a transmission power control step size, said method 
comprising: 

35 
36 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

20 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

at a base station, transmitting transmission pow-
er control information indicating increase or de-
crease of transmission power to a mobile sta-
tion; 
at a mobile station, receiving transmission pow-
er control information from the base station; 
selecting one of a first transmission power con-
trol step size for the normal mode, and a second 
transmission power control step size for the 
compressed mode, the second transmission 
power control step size being greater than the 
first transmission power control step size; 
adjusting transmission power with the transmis-
sion power control step size selected in the se-
lecting step, based on the transmission power 
control information received in the receiving 
step; 
performing interleaving on a frame in bit units in 
the normal mode and in the compressed mode, 
the frame being a unit of a transmission data 
stream; and 
in the normal mode, transmitting the interleaved 
frame continuously in accordance with the trans-
mission power adjusted in the adjusting step 
with the first transmission power control step 
size, and 
in the compressed mode, compressing the in-
terleaved frame, dividing the interleaved and 
compressed frame into a first portion including 
front edge of a frame timing and a second portion 
including rear edge of the frame window, the 
frame window being the same as a frame win-
dow in the normal mode, and transmitting the 
divided frame intermittently, in accordance with 
the transmission power adjusted in the adjusting 
step with the second transmission power control 
step size. 

2. A communication method applied to a mobile com-
munication system in a code division multiple access 
system for continuously transmitting frames in a nor-
mal mode and intermittently transmitting com-
pressed frames in a compressed mode, in accord-
ance with transmission power being controlled with 
a transmission power control step size, said method 
comprising: 

at a mobile station, transmitting transmission 
power control information indicating increase or 
decrease of transmission power to a base sta-
tion; 
at a base station, receiving transmission power 
control information from the mobile station; 
selecting one of a first transmission power con-
trol step size for the normal mode, and a second 
transmission power control step size for the 
compressed mode, the second transmission 
power control step size being greater than the 

first transmission power control step size; 
adjusting transmission power with the transmis-
sion power control step size selected in the se-
lecting step, based on the transmission power 
control information received in the receiving 
step; 
performing interleaving on a frame in bit units in 
the normal mode and in the compressed mode, 
the frame being a unit of a transmission data 
stream; and 
in the normal mode, transmitting the interleaved 
frame continuously in accordance with the trans-
mission power adjusted in the adjusting step 
with the first transmission power control step 
size, and 
in the compressed mode, compressing the in-
terleaved frame, dividing the interleaved and 
compressed frame into a first portion including 
front edge of a frame timing and a second portion 
including rear edge of the frame window, the 
frame window being the same as a frame win-
dow in the normal mode, and transmitting the 
divided frame intermittently, in accordance with 
the transmission power adjusted in the adjusting 
step with the second transmission power control 
step size. 

3. A communication method applied to a base station 
in a code division multiple access system for contin-
uously transmitting frames in a normal mode and 
intermittently transmitting compressed frames in a 
compressed mode, in accordance with transmission 
power being controlled with a transmission power 
control step size, said method comprising: 

receiving transmission power control informa-
tion from a mobile station; 
selecting one of a first transmission power con-
trol step size for the normal mode, and a second 
transmission power control step size for the 
compressed mode, the second transmission 
power control step size being greater than the 
first transmission power control step size; 
adjusting transmission power with the transmis-
sion power control step size selected in the se-
lecting step, based on the transmission power 
control information received in the receiving 
step; 
performing interleaving on a frame in bit units in 
the normal mode and in the compressed mode, 
the frame being a unit of a transmission data 
stream; and 
in the normal mode, transmitting the interleaved 
frame continuously in accordance with the trans-
mission power adjusted in the adjusting step 
with the first transmission power control step 
size, and 
in the compressed mode, compressing the in-

37 
38 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

21 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

terleaved frame, dividing the interleaved and 
compressed frame into a first portion including 
front edge of a frame timing and a second portion 
including rear edge of the frame window, the 
frame window being the same as a frame win-
dow in the normal mode, and transmitting the 
divided frame intermittently, in accordance with 
the transmission power adjusted in the adjusting 
step with the second transmission power control 
step size. 

Patentansprüche 

1. Bei einem mobilen Übertragungssystem in einem 
Codemultiplex-Vielfachzugriffssystem angewende-
tes Übertragungsverfahren zum kontinuierlichen 
Übertragen von Rahmen in einem normalen Modus 
und zum intermittierenden Übertragen verdichteter 
Rahmen in einem verdichteten Modus gemäß einer 
mit einer Übertragungsleistungs-Steuerschrittgröße 
gesteuerten Übertragungsleistung, welches Verfah-
ren aufweist: 

Übertragen von Übertragungsleistungs-Steuer-
informationen, die eine Erhöhung oder eine Ab-
senkung der Übertragungsleistung anzeigen, 
von einer Basisstation zu einer mobilen Station; 
Empfangen der Übertragungsleistungs-Steuer-
informationen von der Basisstation in einer mo-
bilen Station; 
Auswählen von einer aus einer ersten Übertra-
gungsleistungs-Steuerschrittgröße für den nor-
malen Modus und einer zweiten Übertragungs-
leistungs-Steuerschrittgröße für den verdichte-
ten Modus, wobei die zweite Übertragungslei-
stungs-Steuerschrittgröße größer als die erste 
Übertragungsleistungs-Steuerschrittgröße ist; 
Einstellen der Übertragungsleistung mit der in 
dem Auswahlschritt ausgewählten Übertra-
gungsleistungs-Steuerschrittgröße auf der 
Grundlage der in dem Empfangsschritt empfan-
genen Übertragungsleistungs-Steuerinforma-
tionen; 
Durchführen einer Verschachtelung bei einem 
Rahmen in Biteinheiten in dem normalen Modus 
und in dem verdichteten Modus, wobei der Rah-
men eine Einheit eines Übertragungsdaten-
stroms ist; und 
kontinuierliches Übertragen des verschachtel-
ten Rahmens gemäß der in dem Einstellschritt 
mit der ersten Übertragungsleistungs-Steuer-
schrittgröße eingestellten Übertragungslei-
stung in dem normalen Modus, und 
Verdichten des verschachtelten Rahmens, Tei-
len des verschachtelten und verdichteten Rah-
mens in einen ersten Bereich enthaltend die 
Vorderkante eines Rahmenzeitpunkts und ei-

nen zweiten Bereich enthaltend die Hinterkante 
des Rahmenfensters, wobei das Rahmenfen-
ster dasselbe wie ein Rahmenfenster in dem 
normalen Modus ist, und intermittierendes 
Übertragen des geteilten Rahmens gemäß der 
in dem Einstellschritt mit der zweiten Übertra-
gungsleistungs-Steuerschrittgröße eingestell-
ten Übertragungsleistung in dem verdichteten 
Modus. 

2. Bei einem mobilen Übertragungssystem in einem 
Codemultiplex-Vielfachzugriffssystem angewende-
tes Übertragungsverfahren zum kontinuierlichen 
Übertragen von Rahmen in einem normalen Modus 
und zum intermittierenden Übertragen verdichteter 
Rahmen in einem verdichteten Modus gemäß der 
mit einer Übertragungsleistungs-Steuerschrittgröße 
gesteuerten Übertragungsleistung, welches Verfah-
ren aufweist: 

Übertragen von Übertragungsleistungs-Steuer-
informationen, die eine Erhöhung oder Absen-
kung der Übertragungsleistung anzeigen, von 
einer mobilen Station zu einer Basisstation; 
Empfangen der Übertragungsleistungs-Steuer-
informationen von der mobilen Station in einer 
Basisstation; 
Auswählen von einer aus einer ersten Übertra-
gungsleistungs-Steuerschrittgröße für den nor-
malen Modus und einer zweiten Übertragungs-
leistungs-Steuerschrittgröße für den verdichte-
ten Modus, wobei die zweite Übertragungslei-
stungs-Steuerschrittgröße größer als die erste 
Übertragungsleistungs-Steuerschrittgröße ist; 
Einstellen der Übertragungsleistung mit der in 
dem Auswahlschritt ausgewählten Übertra-
gungsleistungs-Steuerschrittgröße auf der 
Grundlage der in dem Empfangsschritt empfan-
genen Übertragungsleistungs-Steuerinforma-
tionen; 
Durchführen einer Verschachtelung bei einem 
Rahmen in Biteinheiten in dem normalen Modus 
und in dem verdichteten Modus, wobei der Rah-
men eine Einheit eines Übertragungsdaten-
stroms ist; und kontinuierliches Übertragen des 
verschachtelten Rahmens gemäß der in dem 
Einstellschritt mit der ersten Übertragungslei-
stungs-Steuerschrittgröße eingestellten Über-
tragungsleistung in dem normalen Modus, und 
Verdichten des verschachtelten Rahmens, Tei-
len des verschachtelten und verdichteten Rah-
mens in einen ersten Bereich enthaltend die 
Vorderkante eines Rahmenzeitpunkts und ei-
nen zweiten Bereich enthaltend die Hinterkante 
des Rahmenfensters, wobei das Rahmenfen-
ster dasselbe wie ein Rahmenfenster in dem 
normalen Modus ist, und intermittierendes 
Übertragen des geteilten Rahmens gemäß der 

39 
40 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

22 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

in dem Einstellschritt mit der zweiten Übertra-
gungsleistungs-Steuerschrittgröße eingestell-
ten Übertragungsleistung in dem verdichteten 
Modus. 

3. Bei einer Basisstation in einem Codemultiplex-Viel-
fachzugriffssystem angewendetes Übertragungs-
verfahren zum kontinuierlichen Übertragen von Rah-
men in einem normalen Modus und zum intermittie-
renden Übertragen verdichteter Rahmen in einem 
verdichteten Modus gemäß einer mit einer Übertra-
gungsleistungs-Steuerschrittgröße 
gesteuerten 
Übertragungsleistung, welches Verfahren aufweist: 

Empfangen von Übertragungsleistungs-Steuer-
informationen von einer mobilen Station; 
Auswählen von einer aus einer ersten Übertra-
gungsleistungs-Steuerschrittgröße für den nor-
malen Modus und einer zweiten Übertragungs-
leistungs-Steuerschrittgröße für den verdichte-
ten Modus, wobei die zweite Übertragungslei-
stungs-Steuerschrittgröße größer als die erste 
Übertragungsleistungs-Steuerschrittgröße ist; 
Einstellen der Übertragungsleistung mit der in 
dem Auswahlschritt ausgewählten Übertra-
gungsleistungs-Steuerschrittgröße auf der 
Grundlage der in dem Empfangsschritt empfan-
genen Übertragungsleistungs-Steuerinforma-
tionen; 
Durchführen einer Verschachtelung bei einem 
Rahmen in Biteinheiten in dem normalen Modus 
und in dem verdichteten Modus, wobei der Rah-
men eine Einheit eines Übertragungsdaten-
stroms ist; und kontinuierliches Übertragen des 
verschachtelten Rahmens gemäß der in dem 
Einstellschritt mit der ersten Übertragungslei-
stungs-Steuerschrittgröße eingestellten Über-
tragungsleistung in dem normalen Modus, und 
Verdichten des verschachtelten Rahmens, Tei-
len des verschachtelten und verdichteten Rah-
mens in einen ersten Bereich enthaltend die 
Vorderkante eines Rahmenzeitpunkts und ei-
nen zweiten Bereich enthaltend die Hinterkante 
des Rahmenfensters, welches Rahmenfenster 
dasselbe wie ein Rahmenfenster in dem norma-
len Modus ist, und intermittierendes Übertragen 
des geteilten Rahmens gemäß der in dem Ein-
stellschritt mit der zweiten Übertragungslei-
stungs-Steuerschrittgröße eingestellten Über-
tragungsleistung in dem verdichteten Modus. 

Revendications 

1. Procédé de communication appliqué à un système 
de communication mobile dans un système d'accès 
multiples par répartition en code pour transmettre en 
continu des trames dans un mode normal et trans-

mettre de manière intermittente des trames com-
pressées dans un mode compressé, selon la puis-
sance de transmission commandée avec une taille 
de pas de commande de puissance de transmission, 
ledit procédé comprenant les étapes consistant à : 

au niveau d'une station de base, transmettre des 
informations de commande de puissance de 
transmission indiquant une augmentation ou 
une diminution de puissance de transmission à 
une station mobile ; 
au niveau d'une station mobile, recevoir des in-
formations de commande de puissance de 
transmission depuis la station de base; 
sélectionner l'une parmi une première taille de 
pas de commande de puissance de transmis-
sion pour le mode normal, et une seconde taille 
de pas de commande de puissance de trans-
mission pour le mode compressé, la seconde 
taille de pas de commande de puissance de 
transmission étant plus grande que la première 
taille de pas de commande de puissance de 
transmission ; 
ajuster la puissance de transmission avec la 
taille de pas de commande de puissance de 
transmission sélectionnée dans l'étape de sé-
lection, en se basant sur les informations de 
commande de puissance de transmission re-
çues dans l'étape de réception ; 
effectuer un entrelacement sur une trame en 
unités de bits dans le mode normal et dans le 
mode compressé, la trame étant une unité d'un 
flux de données de transmission; et 
dans le mode normal, transmettre la trame en-
trelacée en continu selon la puissance de trans-
mission ajustée dans l'étape d'ajustement avec 
la première taille de pas de commande de puis-
sance de transmission, et 
dans le mode compressé, compresser la trame 
entrelacée, diviser la trame entrelacée et com-
pressée en une première portion comprenant le 
front avant d'un rythme de trame et une seconde 
portion comprenant le front arrière de la fenêtre 
de trame, la fenêtre de trame étant la même 
qu'une fenêtre de trame dans le mode normal, 
et transmettre la trame divisée de manière in-
termittente, selon la puissance de transmission 
ajustée dans l'étape d'ajustement avec la se-
conde taille de pas de commande de puissance 
de transmission. 

2. Procédé de communication appliqué à un système 
de communication mobile dans un système d'accès 
multiples par répartition en code pour transmettre en 
continu des trames dans un mode normal et trans-
mettre de manière intermittente des trames com-
pressées dans un mode compressé, selon la puis-
sance de transmission commandée avec une taille 

41 
42 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

23 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

55 

de pas de commande de puissance de transmission, 
ledit procédé comprenant les étapes consistant à: 

au niveau d'une station mobile, transmettre des 
informations de commande de puissance de 
transmission indiquant une augmentation ou 
une diminution de puissance de transmission à 
une station de base ; 
au niveau d'une station de base, recevoir des 
informations de commande de puissance de 
transmission depuis la station mobile ; 
sélectionner l'une parmi une première taille de 
pas de commande de puissance de transmis-
sion pour le mode normal, et une seconde taille 
de pas de commande de puissance de trans-
mission pour le mode compressé, la seconde 
taille de pas de commande de puissance de 
transmission étant plus grande que la première 
taille de pas de commande de puissance de 
transmission ; 
ajuster la puissance de transmission avec la 
taille de pas de commande de puissance de 
transmission sélectionnée dans l'étape de sé-
lection, en se basant sur les informations de 
commande de puissance de transmission re-
çues dans l'étape de réception ; 
effectuer un entrelacement sur une trame en 
unités de bits dans le mode normal et dans le 
mode compressé, la trame étant une unité d'un 
flux de données de transmission ; et 
dans le mode normal, transmettre la trame en-
trelacée en continu selon la puissance de trans-
mission ajustée dans l'étape d'ajustement avec 
la première taille de pas de commande de puis-
sance de transmission, et 
dans le mode compressé, compresser la trame 
entrelacée, diviser la trame entrelacée et com-
pressée en une première portion comprenant le 
front avant d'un rythme de trame et une seconde 
portion comprenant le front arrière de la fenêtre 
de trame, la fenêtre de trame étant la même 
qu'une fenêtre de trame dans le mode normal, 
et transmettre la trame divisée de manière in-
termittente, selon la puissance de transmission 
ajustée dans l'étape d'ajustement avec la se-
conde taille de pas de commande de puissance 
de transmission. 

3. Procédé de communication appliqué à une station 
de base dans un système d'accès multiples par ré-
partition en code pour transmettre en continu des 
trames dans un mode normal et transmettre de ma-
nière intermittente des trames compressées dans 
un mode compressé, selon la puissance de trans-
mission commandée avec une taille de pas de com-
mande de puissance de transmission, ledit procédé 
comprenant les étapes consistant à : 

recevoir des informations de commande de 
puissance de transmission depuis une station 
mobile ; 
sélectionner l'une parmi une première taille de 
pas de commande de puissance de transmis-
sion pour le mode normal, et une seconde taille 
de pas de commande de puissance de trans-
mission pour le mode compressé, la seconde 
taille de pas de commande de puissance de 
transmission étant plus grande que la première 
taille de pas de commande de puissance de 
transmission ; 
ajuster la puissance de transmission avec la 
taille de pas de commande de puissance de 
transmission sélectionnée dans l'étape de sé-
lection, en se basant sur les informations de 
commande de puissance de transmission re-
çues dans l'étape de réception ; 
effectuer un entrelacement sur une trame en 
unités de bits dans le mode normal et dans le 
mode compressé, la trame étant une unité d'un 
flux de données de transmission ; et 
dans le mode normal, transmettre la trame en-
trelacée en continu selon la puissance de trans-
mission ajustée dans l'étape d'ajustement avec 
la première taille de pas de commande de puis-
sance de transmission, et 
dans le mode compressé, compresser la trame 
entrelacée, diviser la trame entrelacée et com-
pressée en une première portion comprenant le 
front avant d'un rythme de trame et une seconde 
portion comprenant le front arrière de la fenêtre 
de trame, la fenêtre de trame étant la même 
qu'une fenêtre de trame dans le mode normal, 
et transmettre la trame divisée de manière in-
termittente, selon la puissance de transmission 
ajustée dans l'étape d'ajustement avec la se-
conde taille de pas de commande de puissance 
de transmission. 

43 
44 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

24 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

25 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

26 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

27 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

28 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

29 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

30 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

31 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

32 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

33 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

34 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

35 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

36 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

37 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

38 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

39 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

40 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

41 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

42 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

43 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

44 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

45 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

46 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

47 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

48 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

49 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

50 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

51 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

52 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

53 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

54 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

55 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

56 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

57 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

58 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

59 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

60 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

61 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

62 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

63 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

64 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

65 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

66 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

67 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

68 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

69 


EP 1 699 141 B1 

70 

REFERENCES CITED IN THE DESCRIPTION 

This list of references cited by the applicant is for the reader's convenience only. It does not form part of the European 
patent document. Even though great care has been taken in compiling the references, errors or omissions cannot be 
excluded and the EPO disclaims all liability in this regard. 

Patent documents cited in the description 

• 
JP 8500475 A [0007] 
• 
WO 9623369 A [0012] 

Non-patent literature cited in the description 

• 
GUSTAFSSON, M et al. Compressed Mode Tech-
niques for Inter-Frequency Measurements in a 
Wide-band DS-CDMA System [0011] 



	

